{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;\red255\green39\blue18;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12060\viewh13200\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf0 \\_sh v3.0 634 Bininj Kunwok Lexicon\
\\_DateStampHasFourDigitYear\
\
\\lx a\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge INTERJ\
\\re what?\
\\de Hey?\
\\de What was that?\
\\de What did you say?\
\\ng said with a high or rising pitch/intonation\
\\dt 28/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx aba\
\\ps interj.\
\\de Conterfactual interjection expressing surprise at a contrary belief to that of the speaker: \'91Oh\'92, \'91oh no\'92, \'91the thing is\'92, \'91no way\'92. conveying that the speaker is shocked or wants to contradict a proposition expressed by an interlocutor.\
\\xv "Aba, yaw kinga nganang. Marndi wurdyaw kayawbaye kadberre warreh," yimeng ngalbu Ngalwakadj bedberre.\
\\xe \'93Oh, I saw a young crocodile. It might bite our kids\'94 Ngalwakadj said to them.\
\\xv "Kandadju kundad dja ngamarrwedoweng." "Aba, minj won, ngaye mak ngamarrwedoweng."\
\\xe \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"Give me a [turtle] leg, because I'm hungry.\'94 \'93No way, I can't give you any. I'm hungry too." \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\so Manakgu, Andrew, \'91Bu Ngurriborlhme Kunwinjku: Learning Kunwinjku\'92, Kunwinjku Language Centre, Gunbalanya, 1994\
\\id DK, MG\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx Abamuli\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Fishing, swimming and camping place on the Goomadeer River about 7km upstream from Mamadawerre outstation. There are many fish in the clear water, including barramundi, sooty grunter and river saw-fish as well as freshwater crocodiles.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx adjbud\
\\va wadjbud\
\\ps n\
\\re sand\
\\re beach\
\\de Beach, sand\
\\xv Kore manyunkurr, adjbud kayo.\
\\xe On the island, there is a beach.\
\\xv Wurruldja  manyunkurrbuyika, ya Wurruldja bolknang then kumwam, koluy wanjh kumwam wadjbudadjbud, wanjh djardahmeng wanjh stuck yimeng kure darnki kurrurla kahbun kure wadjbud Inyarraguluj kumekke nawu namorrorddo kahdi ya.\
\\xe At Wurruldja, another island [Grant Island], yeah Wurruldja [the fv:namorrorddo] looked back [towards Grant Island] and then continued going down along the beach and then become stuck, frozen as rock near where the waves strike him on the beach there at Inyarraguludj, that\'92s where the Namorrorddo is. \
\\so Wildflower Band, \'91Galiwin\'92ku\'92\
\\ur Mawng / Iwaidja = \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
ajput / ajbud.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\id DK, MG\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx adjuh\
\\va adju\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge maybe\
\\re maybe\
\\re who knows\
\\sn 1\
\\de is it?; maybe; I don't know\
\\sn 2\
\\de said after a joke which provides mild embarrassment to the hearer\
\\bw Iwaidja fv:aju 'it-lies', 'it is', 'it exists'.\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx alabbanjdja\
\\va malabbanjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Grewia.spp.\
\\re fi:Grewia_xanthopetala\
\\re fi:Grewia_multiflora\
\\de Kind of shrub.\
\\sc Grewia xanthopetala, Grewia multiflora\
\\ee Both good for firesticks (fire drills). The bark strips of both species can be rolled\
into string.\
\\ur Maung, Iwaidja, Amurdak= alabanjdja\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 15/Jul/2008\
\
\\lx Alalaman\
\\va Ngalalaman\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region \
\\de Area on Magela Creek, downstream from 'Magela Falls' at the end of the Dakdjam gorge area near where the gorge opens out onto the plain. Alalaman is about 20km southeast of Jabiru airport. There is a flow gauge station here known as 'Bowerbird station' and a small billabong on the river, however, the actual site of Alalaman is said to be much further upstream. This is the name for a region of rock art shelters on the Dakdjam-Djurrubu (Magela) Creek downstream from Korokoro. After consultations with knowledgeable Bininj, a decision has been made to refer to the water resources helipad referred to by non-Aboriginal people as "Bowerbird" as Alalaman. All evidence from historical records and oral history suggests that Alalaman is most likely within a couple of kilometres of the helipad. The nearby rock are sites are of high cultural value to Bininj and are considered a no-go area due to the sacred nature of the paintings. Visitors to these sites must not point, photograph, laugh at or even speak in front of the paintings. To do so would risk tempest and flooding or some other personal disaster.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx albun\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Marsdenia viridifloria\
\\re plant name\
\\de kind of plant\
\\xv Albun anme kakarrme karrimang bangkerreng, yiman ka-yime Balanda bobbo ngurrikarrme.\
\\xe fi:Marsdenia_viridifloria has a fruit which we get in the late wet. It's like that fruit\
you white people have, pawpaw.\
\\sc Marsdenia viridifloria\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Alkidjdjirrwan\
\\va Ngalkidjdjirrwan, Alkidjirrwan\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place_name\
\\re place on Alligator River\
\\de Place on the western side of the middle reaches of the East Alligator River associated with a stringybark fi:djang or sacred site.\
\\xv Kabirri-yime dolobbo djang bad fi:really kun-ngey Alkidjdjirrwan. Ka-bolkngeyyo warridj.\
\\xe They refer to it as the stringybark dreaming place but its real name is Alkidjdjirrwan. That\'92s also the name of that place.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 22/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx alngayakmi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Ubarr.messenger\
\\re messenger for Ubarr ceremony\
\\re Ubarr ceremony messenger\
\\de Ceremonial messenger in the Ubarr ceremony who travels to a distant place to bring groups of people to the ceremony.\
\\ee In the Kunabibi ceremony, this person is called fv:kakkawarr. Note: these words are in the public domain.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx alwalngurru\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lizard.sp.\
\\re Chameleon dragon\
\\re fi:Chelosania_brunnea\
\\de Chameleon dragon\
\\sc Chelosania brunnea\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur E= walwalngurru, I= ngalbangurru\
\\pdn kk= kerngborlh\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 26/Aug/2012\
\
\\lx Amurdak\
\\va Mamurdak\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language name\
\\de The Amurdak language.\
\\ee A dialect of Amurdak, now extinct, was spoken by coastal Ulbu people in the Ardahaj (Pawpaw Beach) region. This variety of Amurdak is called Urrirrk or Wurrirrkwurrirrk\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\bb Handelsmann, R. (1991). Towards a description of Amurdak: A language of northern Australia. Unpublished BA (Hons) thesis,\
University of Melbourne, Melbourne.\
\\uv W, Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur I= Mamurdak\
\\sy Wurradjbak\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Anbiruk Karredjdjamdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area possibly at the top of a gorge in the headwaters of the Goomadeer River, near Kirrbekirrbendulk around 24km south (upstream) of the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 and \'91Goomadeer\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River. Literally means \'91The place of the Blepharocarya depauperata tree.\'92 (Ka-dedj-djamdi \'91it-base-located\'92).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx anbirrmulu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge shovel.spear\
\\re spear, shovel spear\
\\de Shovel spear type with a long stone blade for the head. These may be the predecessors of the famous \'91shovel-nosed\'92 spears of Arnhem Land which have heads made of iron or other metal originally obtained from the Macassans. The stone blade is attached to the shaft via a socket made of fibre string ironwood resin and beeswax.\
\\dt 06/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx Anborlun\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de River site in the Maburrinj estate. Fish go upstream from here. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Anbuddu Baniworrinj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re place in Djalbangurrk estate\
\\de Place name just south of Makkalarl in the Djalbangurrk estate.\
\\ee This is a place for hunting freshwater crocodiles.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Andale Abayeng\
\\va Mandale Ngabayeng\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge clan_lect\
\\re clan lect interjection for the Warddjak patriclan (Kundjikurdubuk lineage)\
\\re Warddjak clan lect (Kundjikurdubuk lineage)\
\\de Clan lect or fv:kun-dangwok interjection for the Warddjak patriclan (Kundjikurdubuk lineage)\
\\xv A: Na-ngale nuye kun-red Muri? B: Andale abayeng.\
\\xe A: Who owns the place called Muri?  B: Warddjak clan [The patriclan which uses the interjection] fi:andale_abayeng [i.e.\
pragmatically infer the Kundjikurdubuk lineage of the Warddjak patriclan]\
\\sd kun-dangwok\
\\dt 22/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx Andjalabanh\
\\va Mandjalabanh\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre-Kubumi estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Animirlokrlok\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A namorrorddo spirit site on a flat rocky plain on the upper Goomadeer River. The spirit inhabits a small column of rock, and this site and part of the surrounding plain are referred to as Animirloklok. The area is in the arc formed by the confluence of the Goomadeer and Gumardir rivers, not far from the confluence itself. Both the laterals in this word are retroflexed and so the word is written Ani-mi-rlok-rlok.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 18/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Ankikkalarr\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Ankombod\
\\va Mankombod\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Area on the East Alligator River about 40km southeast (upstream) from Cahill's Crossing. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 4/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Anlolorr\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place just west of Mibarlwarra on the Liverpool River and site of the Wubarr ceremony.\
\\xv Anlolorr wubarr kumekke ka-o.\
\\xe At Anlolorr there is a wubarr ceremony place.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx Anyirrburala\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de A duwa moiety Kunibidji language speaking patriclan in the lower Liverpool River district and other discontiguous areas to the east.\
\\xv Konda ka-bolkngeyyo Djawundu Durhduhkeng nawu Kunibidji kabirri-ngeybun Kangkarlangarra Namardba Kayelarr\'e1ba. Manengkarerrbe kanjdji, Anyirrburala Warrkwarrk kaddum.\
\\xe This place is called Djawundu Durhduhkeng [in Bininj Kunwok, which literally means 'white-breasted sea eagle drilled a hole'] and the Kunibidji people call it [in Ndj\'e9bbana language] Kangkarlangarra Namardba Kayelarr\'e1ba. Manengkarerrbe clan is downstream and Anyirrburala and Warrkwarrk (joint) clans are upstream (from this place).\
\\ee Anyirrburala has a very close connection and many jointly shared sites with the Warrkwarrk clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so Dean Yibarbuk, Liverpool River site survey 2005\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx arda\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge OK.then\
\\re OK then!\
\\de OK then, all right?\
\\ng a propositional interjection marking the completion of a speaker's extended turn of talk\
\\bw probably a loan from Iwaidja\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx arre\
\\va ngarre\
\\mr (ng)arr+re > (ng)arre '1,2 minimal+go'\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re go, let's go (you and me)\
\\de Let's go (you singular and me).\
\\ng first person dual inclusive (1,2 minimal)\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\uv I, E = ngarre, W = ngarrre [ngarr+re]\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Arrkuluk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\sn 1\
\\re place name\
\\de Name of the hill on the southern side of Gunbalanya township in Mengerrdji language country.\
\\sn 2\
\\re place name in the Gunbalanya township\
\\de Hill on the western side of the entrance to Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek valley, directly south of the Gunbalanya-Nabarlek road. This site has the same name as the hill at Gunbalanya and is therefore sometimes called \'91Arrkuluk number two\'92.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\u8232 \\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx awurd\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge oh.my.dear\
\\re goodness me, 'oh how dear it is'\
\\de an interjection used to express emotional attachment, dearness\
\\xv Awurd, mayh namekke ngan-kodjborledke Kawk Kabim Djang\
\\xe So dear to me is that bird, its call reminds me of the sacred night heron dreaming.\
\\sy worro\
\\so Nabarlek Band song (Terrah Guymala)\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= worro\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx ay\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge hey\
\\re hey\
\\de hey! (attention getter)\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Ayendemarrbara\
\\va Yenemarrbara\
\\va Yenemarrabara\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Two large boulders on the side of the river valley cliff face on the west bank of Goomadeer [Kumadderr] river near Kunyikuymi. These represent two ancestral Dreaming dogs Yenemarrbara and Nakorrmohkorrmo. Many Kunwinjku dogs today are given these names. The site is a djang (Dreaming site) and part of the Kabbari complex.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ba\
\\va ba bu\
\\ps conj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge so.that\
\\re so that\
\\de so that\
\\xv Yi-rrolkka ba karri-re.\
\\xe Get up so we can go.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge but\
\\re but\
\\de but\
\\xv Ba minj birri-nayinj nganabbarru yoy, wanjh man-wurrk bi-wayhkeng..\
\\xe But they didn't see a buffalo sleeping there until a bush fire woke him up.\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx ba-\
\\ps pron. pref.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge 3sgPAST\
\\re pronominal prefix\
\\de 3rd person singular past tense (3 minimal past) intransitive pronominal prefix\
\\xv Ba-djalwam, konda ba-rrurrkmeng man-burnda ba-yini.\
\\xe He kept going and here he pulled up fi:Hypoxis_nervosa herb and sat there with it.\
\\sn 2\
\\de 3rd person singular past tense subject acting on a 3rd person singular non-human object (3 minimal/3 minimal non human object past)\
\\xv An-bang ba-bonguneng.\
\\xe (S)he drank poison.\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\uv I, E, W= \'f8 (zero).\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx babang\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\ng a kind of adjective which can take predicate prefixes (pronominal and nominal)\
\\ge be.painful\
\\re hurting\
\\re painful\
\\de sore, be in pain\
\\xv Nga-bardbabang.\
\\xe I have a sore knee.\
\\xv Baleh yimi bu yi-yingkimimbabangni?\
\\xe How long has your eye been sore?\
\\pdn kk = ngarrkme\
\\uv I, Djnj, W\
\\ur E = ngarkme\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Babarrhdjarayi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place in Waybburda estate\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx babba\
\\pr na- \
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kun-derbit.term\
\\re fv:kun-derbi tri-relational term\
\\sn 1\
\\de kun-derbi tri-relational kin term; my mother's father, your father, you are my nephew (ZC) \
\\sn 2\
\\de kun-derbi kin term; my son, your fv:mamamh (MF, MFB, MFZ), you are my uncle (MB)\
\\sn 3\
\\de kun-derbi kin term; my fv:mamamh (MF, MFB, MFZ), your father\
\\cn na-kiwalak, ngal-kiwalak\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx babbulibun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge carry.on.shoulder\
\\re carry with a stick over shoulder\
\\de carry a load attached to a stick over the shoulder, especially fish\
\\xv Yi-djirribiwo ba nga-babbilibun djenj.\
\\xe Tie the fish up (passing vine or string through the gills) so I can carry them on a stick.\
\\xv Karri-madjbabbulibun.\
\\xe Let's carry our swag on a stick over our shoulder.\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx babinjbabinj\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\va babinjbabinj fs:(no_prefix)\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Livistonia.benthamii\
\\re Livistonia benthamii\
\\de kind of fan-leaved palm tree (10-15m)\
\\sc Livistonia benthamii\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\sn 2\
\\ge palm.spp.\
\\re Livistonia_rigida\
\\de Also used for large rare palms such as unusual specimens of cabbage tree palm and rarer specimens of fi:Livistona_rigida such as\
those which grow at Mataranka. Some speakers will apply the name to the cabbage tree palm fi:Corypha_elata, usually known as\
fv:kulwirri.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx babmang\
\\rd babbabmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge catch\
\\re catch\
\\de catch an object which has been thrown\
\\xv Bu ngurri-dirri ngaleng ka-burriwe wanjh ngudda yi-babma.\
\\xe If you're going to play, she'll throw it (the ball) and you've got to catch it.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge pull.in\
\\re pull in, reel in (e.g. fishing line)\
\\de reel in, pull in (e.g. a fishing line or rope)\
\\xv Yi-yarlbabbabmang werrk!\
\\xe Quick, pull in the line!\
\\pdn babmimodme\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx babmimodme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sn 1\
\\ge catch\
\\re catch (fi:kun-kurrng register), \
\\de catch\
\\sn 2\
\\re pull in line or rope (fi:kun-kurrng register)\
\\de pull in line or rope\
\\pde babmang\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Baboryi\
\\va Babori\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\de place name in upper Cadell River region\
\\xv Baboryi kure bedberre Warrayhngu kun-red.\
\\xe Baboryi is a place that belongs to the Warrayhngu clan.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bad\
\\pr kun-\
\\va badno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge rock\
\\re rock, stone\
\\de rock, stone\
\\ng incorporable\
\\xv Kun-bad maneh ngah-kan kuni nga-kurrme ku-bolh nga-bengkan nga-wohmang. \
\\xe I'll take this rock with me so I'll just put it by the side of the road and pick it up when I think about it on the way back. \
\\sd geographic\
\\so Jimmy Kalarriya\
\\sn 2\
\\ge money\
\\re money, coins\
\\de money, coin(s)\
\\xv Kan-badwo fv:drink nga-bayahme!\
\\xe Give me some coins, I'll buy a drink!\
\\sy kun-wardde\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W, Djnj= kun-wardde\
\\pdn kun-bangam\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx badbardang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge stone.axe\
\\re stone axe\
\\de stone axe type\
\\uv E\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badbirri\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Uvaria.rupestre\
\\re fi:Uvaria_rupestre\
\\de Rock country tree with an edible yellow fruit.\
\\xv Namekke nadjinem manme ka-ngun man-badbirri, yika ka-kolung ku-wardde ka-kolung\
man-buyhbuyika ka-ngun.\
\\xe That black rock kangaroo eats Uvaria fruit, sometimes it comes down from the rocks and eats other kinds of food.\
\\sc Uvaria rupestre\
\\uv Djnj, I, W\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badbong\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rock.wallaby\
\\re short-eard rock wallaby\
\\re fi:Petrogale_brachyotis\
\\de short eared rock wallaby\
\\xv Nakka yahwurdurd nabarlek nawu. Djal namekke yahwurd kabene-kebrohrok. Ka-ngarlabakbala konda, ka-ngarlabak\
badbong. Ka-wanjbala. Kun-ngarlabak, kun-wanj. fs:Line kakarrme kure ku-nngarlabak. Ka-ngarlabakyirriyo kala\
kala. 'Hey nabarlek badbong badbong' ngarriyime. Dja nabarlek ka-djalwanjngurlme.\
\\xe The nabarlek is small. Otherwise they have the same face. The short-eared rock wallaby has a white line running along its cheeks. It has a flat underarm area. The cheeks and underarm parts [are diagnostic]. It has a line running along its cheeks, a different colour and\
we see it and say 'Hey that's a nabarlek and that's a short-eared rock wallaby.' The nabarlek has a dark underarm area.\
\\sc Petrogale brachyotis\
\\pdn dolhwarr\
\\sd mammal\
\\p UpperKDjorlomx2.badbong.1, badbongYikarrakkal3.JPG (rock art various)\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx badborndek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge planigales\
\\sn 1\
\\re common planigale\
\\re fi:Planigale_maculata\
\\de Common planigale.\
\\sc Planigale maculata\
\\sn 2\
\\re long-tailed planigale\
\\de Long-tailed planigale.\
\\sc Planigale ingrami\
\\xv Badborndek ku-rurrk ka-yo, ku-badrurrk.\
\\xe Planigales lives in holes/crevices, in the rocks.\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx badbu\
\\sn 1\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge INTERJ.\
\\re that's what I mean!\
\\de exactly right!, absolutely! that's what I mean!\
\\xv Badbu djalkurrmerrinj ngayi nga-bengkan... I know!\
\\xe Yes, that's right, I know it put itself there, I know that.\
\\sn 2\
\\ps subord. conj.\
\\ge when/if\
\\re when (subordinate conjunction)\
\\de when, if\
\\xv Badbu djal ngaleng werrk ngun-nang, wanjh ngun-kukbawon.\
\\xe When she [an emu] spots you first [before you see her], well she'll run away from you.\
\\xv Badbu kondabu ngarri-nankah arri-bukkayi manekke.\
\\xe If we see some here, we should show it to him.\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx baddi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.rock\
\\re rock, having rock\
\\de having rock\
\\xv Kure ka-baddi ngarrih-nang.\
\\xe We saw it where those rocks are.\
\\sy -wardderri\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx baddubal\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re plant name (unidentified)\
\\de kind of plant\
\\sc unidentified\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx baddumang\
\\ps n.\
\\re glass, mirror\
\\re mirror, glass\
\\re swimming goggles\
\\de Mirror, glass.\
\\xe \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Baddumang ngarrikebnarren.\
\\xv We are looking at our faces in the mirror.\
\\xv Warlirr kundung karrirung, kunekke kadberre karrirung, dja baddumang kabirrikarrme, baddumang kabirrikarrme kune ka-yime kakolhdebebme, kakolhdebebme, soon kabirrikarrme, glass, mirror, soon kabirrikarrme kadberre yiman muddikang rerri. Bokenh kabenekarrme, glass baddumang kukak kabirribebme.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\xe When the sun is hot, when we get really hot, then they have pieces of glass and when plants start sending out new growth [just before rain comes] then they [spirit beings] have pieces of glass and they take us away in something like a motor vehicle. They are in pairs with their pieces of glass and they appear at night.\
\\so Jimmy Bungurru (first language was Ndj\'e9bbana).\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\bw From Makassarese patomang \'91compass\'92. Note also Ndj\'e9bbana fv:badd\'famang \'91swimming goggles, glass, mirror\'92. Also Iwaidja badumang (or bathumang) and Mawng patumang \'91glass, mirror\'92\
\\id DK, MG\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\\lx Baddjirdi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re place in Benebenemdi estate\
\\sd placename\
\\de site with a waterfall in Benebenemdi estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx badken\
\\pr na-\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr man-\
\\pr birri-, ngarri-, karri- etc\
\\ge from.rock\
\\re rock country association, (having)\
\\de associated with the stone country\
\\xv Birri-badken minj korroko mi-kurrula birri-diwirrinj.\
\\xe A long time ago those people who live in the rock country didn't go near the coastal/saltwater area.\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur -warddeken\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Badkorol\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de name of an estate or fv:kun-ngeybadjan regional name on the south-east Arnhem Land plateau.\
\\xv Barrk ka-rri djukerre. Kanjdjikanjdji mak ngalengman ngamed ngarri-yime bu kodjok, Durhnokah nani ka-rri.\
Badkorol kukadje.\
\\xe There are male and female black wallaroos fi:(Macropus_bernadus) there. Downstream too where Kodjok's country is there at\
Durhnokah, they also live there too. At Badkorol there are many of them.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badkurruyul\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rock.wallaby\
\\re rock wallaby (large specimens of fi:Peradorcus_concinna and fi:Petrogale_brachyotis)\
\\de name for an exceptionally large male short-eared rock wallably or nabarlek\
\\sc Peradorcus concinna,Petrogale brachyotis\
\\xv Merlbbe, ya na-rangem kurrulambidj. Kune kayime ngarri-wokdi Kundedjnjenghmi fs:all_kind. Badkurruyul nawu\
nabarlek yi-bengkan na-kimuk, badkurruyul.\
\\xe The female agile wallaby is called fi:merlbbe and the male fi:kurrulambidj. That's what we say in Kundedjnjenghmi, all kinds (of\
names). A big nabarlek is called fi:badkurruyul.\
\\so LBN\
\\xv Badbong nakka yahwurdurd, la badbong nawu na-kimuk ngarri-ngeybun badkurruyul. Badbong yahwurd. Nawu\
ku-rurrk kah-di. fs:Whole_lot kabirri-kukrohrok badbong badkurruyul.\
\\xe The short-eared rock wallaby is small but a very large individual we call fv:badkurruyul. The name fv:badbong is for the smaller ones.\
They live in caves. They are the same animal though, the fi:badbong and the fi:badkurruyul.\
\\so Djungkidj Nginjdjalarrkku\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Badmardi\
\\va Badmarddi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fv:yirridjdja moiety patriclan\
\\xv Weyakweyak ba-kurlbakani kurlba ba-rey. Bayimi 'yuy yuy' ba-kayhmi ba-yuyhmirey, fi:that kurlba ba-kadjungi\
fi:line_up anekke kun-wardde fi:line ka-djale ba-yibmeng konda, kalkberd, nakkan Nawarray-beh ba-rrolkang. \
dabborrabbolk nuye bu Nangukwirridj na-kohbanj na-Badmardi, ya Bangardi nawu. Na-Badmardini, na-ngamed nuye\
Nayombolmi nuye kornkumo ba-rroweng makka nungka beywurd Nayombolmi.\
\\xe Black-faced cuckoo shrike fi:(Coracina_novaehollandiae) followed the trail of blood. He groaned 'yuy yuy', and went along calling out\
'yuy' and he followed the blood and these rocks are all lined up [indicating the route the kangaroo took] and he keeps going and sank\
here, that male euro who came from Nawarray. It belonged (the dreaming) to that old Badmardi clansman Nangukwirridj, yeah\
Bangardi. He was Bangardi, Nayombolmi's father, and his son was Nayombolmi.\
\\ee fv:Wuluwulubirddi is the Badmardi clan fv:kundangwok interjection.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so LBN, Badmardi/Worrkorl site survey\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Badunu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Waybburda estate\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badyalk\
\\pr na-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rock.honey\
\\re honey type found in rock\
\\de type of honey hive found in rock crevices and the bees that produce it\
\\sy (m)an-yalk\
\\uv I= na-badyalk, Djnj= an-badyalk\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pipe\
\\re pipe for smoking\
\\de European style smoking pipe\
\\bw most likely an English loan but note Makassarese fi:patti 'chest, case' and fi:kalling 'tin, can' and cf Iwaidja fi:patjukaling 'large\
container, drum' and Burarra fi:bajikala 'long smoking pipe'.\
\\sy djikka\
\\pdn kk= kun-muluru.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjan\
\\sn 1\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge big\
\\re big\
\\de big one , large\
\\xv Naneh bukka fs:rope mey yarlbadjan nungan bukka marnbom, marnbom, koluy, koluy wurlebmeng yawam, kayakki.\
Dabbolk koluy. Koluy wurlebmeng yawam kayakki ku-barrkidbe. Wurlebmeng rawoyh yawam kayakki. \
\\xe He got a large rope, organised it and went down into the water, looked for the crocodile but nothing. It was the older brother who went\
down.  He went down again in another direction looked for it but couldn't find it.\
\\xv Manekke nga-yolyolme manbu dabbarabbolk birrih-ngeybu birlmu, birlmu. Nakka warlakki la wardurrkku nakka\
na-kimuk na-badjan nakka, na-wardurrkku.\
\\xe I'll talk about which names the old generation used to refer to the barramundi. They called them fv:birlmu but that is only for the\
smaller ones. The name fv:wardurrkku is used for the really big individuals, or fv:na-wardurrkku.\
\\nt Can be prefixed by an incorporated body part which is commonly used in joking relationship insults such as the following examples:\
\\xv Kun-wern njamed man-me marne-yakwon. fs:[laughter] Yi-kornbadjan! \
\\xe I'm going to finish up, whatsit, ... all of your food. You big balls!\
\\sn 2\
\\ps n.\
\\ge main.one\
\\re progenitor\
\\de progenitor\
\\xv O: birndu badjan, al-badjan nani nawu!\
\\xe Oh this [ceremonial sculpture of a mosquito] is the progenitor of mosquitoes, the mother of all mosquitoes, that's what it is.\
\\xv Yo, an-kurndalh ka-yoyo an-badjan kun-red kumekke. Ka-yo an-kurndalh.\
\\xe Yes, the fi:Vitex_glabrata trees are everywhere in that country. That is the mother country for them, the source of all fi:Vitex_glabrata\
trees. There are many fi:Vitex_glabrata trees there.\
\\sn 3\
\\pr al-\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mother\
\\re mother (of referent)\
\\de the mother (of a referent)\
\\xv Na-kornkumo ka-kan wurdyaw nuye ngal-badjan larrk ka-re yaw larrk.\
\\xe The father [emu] takes the chicks, not the mother, she goes off by herself without the chicks.\
\\xv Walk na-beno, na-kudji kaluk Balang bi-kang. Ngal-badjan Kodjdjan. Kamarrang bi-bornang.\
\\xe A boy of Balang subsection was a  candidate for his impending  circumcision ceremony. His mother was of Kodjdjan subsection. His\
father was Kamarrang subsection.\
\\sn 4\
\\pr na-\
\\ge mother's.brother\
\\re uncle (mother's brother) of referent\
\\de mother's brother (of referent)\
\\xv Nanih na-badjan bi-yawmey.\
\\xe This is his uncle here, the one whose sister gave birth to him (or 'is in his upper adjacent generation matriline').\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjan yaw\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mother.child\
\\re matrilineal generation skewing\
\\de kind of matrilineal generation skewing whereby a person and their classificatory mother or mother's brother can call each other siblings\
\\ee fv:Badjan_yaw skewing is a rarer type of generation skewing which is practiced by some western Bininj Kun-wok groups (Gun-djeihmi and Kunwinjku) whereby a man and his sister's children can sometimes skew generations and call each other siblings.\
The MB/mZC relationship is referred to in Bininj Kun-wok as fv:badjan-yaw 'mother-child' or 'matrileal couple'.  This skewing rule was a feature of some of the smaller, now-extinct Alligator Rivers region languages (Mengerrdji, Erre, Urningangk, Wurradjbak) whom\
Bininj Kun-wok speakers once described as fv:kun-barrkid 'foreigners, different people'.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjanwalawalak\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge MyZ\
\\re mother's youngest sister\
\\de mother's youngest sister (or younger sisters)\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjanwarreken\
\\pr na-\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mother's.country\
\\re mother's (or mother's brother's) country\
\\de pertaining to the clan affiliation and land of one's mother and/or mother's brother\
\\sd kinship\
\\sy karrardwarreken\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjbarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mat\
\\re mat\
\\re net or woven mat\
\\de net or woven pandanus mat used for sitting on or as part of a particular kind of fish trap. Also used as a sieve to process/rinse fv:an- gindjek cheeky yam slices fi:Dioscorea_bulbifera.\
\\xv Kunkalewobe manu babalhmi kunkod kundulk badjabdjabnami wanjh\
bakirndihnami wanjh babalhmi kunkodyih kunkod babalhmi bonj\
fs:after_that djenj babidbuni bayoyo kadjongi fs:full bayimi kume\
bamirnderri wanjh babomunkeweyi kubuyika kure kaborei wanjh djenj\
ba-[?] njamed bakurrmi njamed, badjbarra, badjbarra nawu yakngarra\
karrikadjung kaluk kabarrimarnbun fs:different_way bedman\
fs:old_people barrimarnbuni fs:like yiman fs:net kayime wanjh\
barrinanganani barrikurrmi djenj bamankani badjalwarrhmi babarlmi\
kabarriburriwe badjalyawoyhwarrhmi barriyawoyhkurrmi badjbarra\
Yiga milirl yoh manekke.\
\\xe Kunkalewobe are fence fishtraps made from paperbark and a fence of stakes which then hold the paperbark used to block the fish. After that the fish having gone upstream come back with the current and are washed through a sluice way into a woven container. A long net called badjbarra made from pandanus which the old people made in a different fashion [to how we do weaving today] like a net and the fish would fall into [a basket] and when they saw that it was full they would throw out the fish and set it again and the fish would fall into it again. Badjbarra, yes, sometimes it was also made of fi:Trophis_scandens vine.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 21/Jul/2008\
\
\\lx badjdjeng\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de bash, hit to injure\
\\xv Kun-wardde nga-kodjbadjdji.\
\\xe I bashed it on the head with a rock.\
\\pdn kk = bonghme\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjdjo\
\\va badju\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Brachystelma glabriflorum\
\\re fi:Brachystelma_glabriflorum\
\\de small herbaceous plant which has an edible radish-like tuber\
\\sc Brachystelma glabriflorum\
\\bw possibly from Makassarese fi:pacco 'Arum colocasia R., a plant with roots which are edible after cooking'. Cf Bajau fi:pacco 'taro, Colocasia esculenta'. Also Mawng fi:badjdjung 'yam type'.\
\\uv I, Djnj, E, W\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjdjowalawala\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mantis.sp.\
\\re praying mantis insect\
\\de kind of large (15cm) greyish praying mantis insect\
\\xv Badjdjowalawala ka-mulewan badjdjo.\
\\xe The grey Praying Mantis indicates (the location of) bush radishes (fi:Microstema_tuberosum).\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjno\
\\mr badj+no 'pipe+3rd person possessor suffix'\
\\ps n.\
\\ge hive.entrance\
\\re hive entrance tube\
\\de external entrance tube to a bee hive\
\\sy kebno, ngalkno\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\p roll 95 - 19.jpg (in Ankung excursion folder, iPhoto)\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjorr\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge foot[kk]\
\\re foot (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de foot\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-denge\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjorrkorrongko\
\\mr badjorr+korrongko 'foot+big'\
\\ps n.\
\\ge buffalo[kk]\
\\re buffalo (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de buffalo\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde nganabbarru\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjorrmorndi\
\\mr badjorr+morndi 'foot+lie'\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge tracks.lie\
\\re tracks are on the ground (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de tracks lie\
\\xv Badjorrkorrongko ka-badjorrmorndi.\
\\xe Nganabbarru ka-bokyo.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bok-yo\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx badjubadju\
\\ps n.\
\\ge shirt\
\\re shirt\
\\de shirt\
\\bw from Makassarese fi:bajubaju, 'men's short-sleeved shirt, jacket.'\
\\uv I\
\\un This word is becoming obsolete and is only used by some Kuninjku speakers.\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bak\
\\pr man-\
\\va kun-bak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge water.weed\
\\re water weed\
\\re algae\
\\re aquatic herbs\
\\gi incorporable\
\\de generic name for many kinds of submerged aquatic herbs and algae\
\\xv Man-bak ka-djordme ku-ronj. Man-yirrekyirrek.\
\\xe fv:Man-bak grows in the water. It is a slimey plant.\
\\xv An-karnbirr, manekke man-me ngalengarre an-kulurrudj o yika bakno ka-ngun bakno, kun-bak bu karri-nan ku-wukku manekke ka-welengbakngun.\
\\xe fi:Acacia_oncinocarpa, that is her [emu's] food, Livistonia palm seeds, or sometimes water weed, the weeds you see in the water, she can then go and eat that too.\
\\sc e.g. fv:Eriocaulon_setaceum\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bakarlbakarl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Curcuma.australasica\
\\re fi:Curcuma_australasica\
\\de Herb with small tubers eaten by black wallaroos and other kangaroos.\
\\xv Kudjewk ka-kobun bakarlbakarl.\
\\xe fi:Curcuma_australasica flowers in the wet season.\
\\xv Karndayh, morruyhmorruyh kabine-ngun bakarlbakarl.\
\\xe The female Antilopine kangaroo and the ring-tailed dragon eat fi:Curcuma_australasica.\
\\xv Ngarri-ngeybun ken njamed bakarlbakarl, yoh nani nawu ka-kukyime [draws in the sand]... nungan nadjinem nuye namekke ka-karung kare yi-nan bu Dukaladjarranj ku-warddewardde ka-karung.\
\\xe We call this plant fv:bakarlbakarl, yes, and it looks like this [draws in sand]... it is food for the black wallaroo, it digs it up and you can see it growing in the rock country there at Dukaladjarranj where the wallaroos in the rock country dig it up.\
\\sc Curcuma australasica\
\\uv E\
\\ur Djnj= an-ngarranjngarranj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Bakbarre\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A rock art shelter in the Kudjekbinj estate near Naworo to the west.\uc0\u8232 \\xv Darnki Naworo. Naworo koyek, Bakbarre karrikad. Kunrurrk mankimuk bim dorrengh.\u8232 \\xe Bakbarre is near Naworo which is to the east and Bakbarre is west. It is a large shelter with paintings\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx bakbele\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge brown\
\\re brown, reddish in colour\
\\re reddish colour\
\\de brown or reddish in colour\
\\sn 2\
\\de person of mixed Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal descent\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bakkadji\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.rat\
\\re black-footed tree rat\
\\re fi:Mesembriomys_gouldi\
\\de Black-footed tree rat.\
\\sc Mesembriomys gouldi\
\\nt fv:kun-kurrng ka-ngeyyo, 'it has a fi:kun-kurrng name' (but not remembered)\
\\sd mammal\
\\p bakkadji05.JPG (in NT wildlife file)\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Bakkalali\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re placename\
\\sd placename\
\\de place name in Marlkawo estate, where the Marlkawo outstation airstrip is located.\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Bakkarda\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge yikurrumu.name\
\\re fv:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name\
\\de name of a fv:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name for the Kardbam patriclan\
\\xv Bene-djalwam kondah ka-rradjme kure njamed yi-bengkan Kakalirri. Ka-bokyo Nakkorrkko yurryurrhmeng bokkurrmerrinj. Kumekke ka- rradjme. Kumekke ka-rradjme ngalengman Bakkarda-ken kanjdji mak ngayi-ken\
Wurrbbarnbulu-ken kaddum  kaluk Kabarnderre manekke area ngayi ngarduk.\
\\xe They [the Nakkorrkko father and son ancestral heroes] travelled and finished [a particular activity], you know near Kakalirri. There are\
marks in the rock there where they made a direction mark in the rock [by dragging their feet]. That's where they finished. They finished\
there in the Bakkarda fi:yikurrumu clan estate which is downstream and my Wurrbbarnbulu clan is upstream from there and also\
Kabarnderre which is also in my country.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bakke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge break\
\\re break (v.t.)\
\\de break OBJ.\
\\xv Bi-mobom laik bekkang yimeng fi:thay yimeng mobakkeng kun-badyih bonj.\
\\xe He broke the bones and he heard them crack 'crunch' he broke the bone with a rock.\
\\sn 2\
\\de injure seriously, render incapacitated\
\\xv Ngudda yim-ray, Doddorok rawoyhngorrmey ngorrmey wanjh ruy rawoyhno ruy, 'Wa wa wa nga-rung, nga-rung,\
nga-rung, ngan-bakkeng, ngan-bakkeng'.\
\\xe You come here chestnut-quilled rock pigeon and he picked it up again, trying to lift it but he got burnt again "Ow ow ow, I'm burnt, it's\
injured me, it's injured me.'\
\\sn 3\
\\de compose a song about a person or incident, be able to perform (orally) or recite something\
\\ng This construction is of the form SUBJ/OBJ-break.\
\\xv Djimarr benbakkeng yawurrinj man-dule bedberre.\
\\xe Djimarr created a song for/about the young men.\
\\xv Nungan bakkerrinj Darwin birri-wam, kun-bang birri-bonguneng wanjh birri-bawong\
mayahmayahmeng.\
\\xe He composed it (a song) about himself when they went to Darwin and got drunk and they left him and\
he became lost.\
\\xv Nanih kukbele ngaban-bukkan nawu kure ngarrku djang bedda ngandi-marneyimeng Bulanj nawu na-Kardbam nawu kun-wok ka-bakke kun-mayali mey yiman ngad Bininj karri-wokdi.\
\\xe This white man here, I'm showing them the dreaming of ours, they have been discussing it, this man of Bulanj subsection and Kardbam\
clan, who speaks the language fluently and talks as we Aboriginal people talk.\
\\rd fv:-bakbakke 'break repeatedly or as a process of breaking', fv:-bakabakke 'break up into pieces'\
\\pdn -murridjke, (variant > murridjdje)\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bakki\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tobacco\
\\re tobacco\
\\de tobacco\
\\xv Bakkiyak barri-yikani, bakki barri-dowerrinj. \
\\xe They had no tobacco and so they went off to get it as they were starving for it.\
\\xv Minj wari birri-yimeninj, birri-warihmeninj bakki njalenjale kun-madj. Bonj lahlarrk birri-djalni kun-madjyak\
kun-kare. \
\\xe They didn't worry about tobacco [at that time] or other [modern] possessions. They just went about naked, not having any clothes long\
ago in the past.\
\\xv Bu yi-bawon bakki kamak wanjh.\
\\xe It would be good if you gave up smoking.\
\\sy kun-dolng\
\\pdn kun-djule\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bakkirrikirri\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re spear type\
\\de Kind of spear with many uniserial saw-like barbs.\
\\sn 2\
\\re saw (cutting tool)\
\\de Saw (cutting tool).\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bakme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge break\
\\re break (v.i.)\
\\de break\
\\rd -bakabakme 'break into many pieces'\
\\rd -bakbakme 'break in many places', 'go through a process of breaking down'\
\\xv Yun yi-kilekme warde ka-bakme.\
\\xe Don't interfere with it or it might break.\
\\pdn -murridjme, redup.= -murrimurridjme\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bakmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge go.breaking\
\\re go along breaking\
\\de Go along breaking (something), e.g. butchering a crocodile and the cracking of the backbone as it is pulled back.\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx bal-\
\\ps adv. pref.\
\\re away, along\
\\re maove along move away from\
\\de Directional prefix on verbs with two possible senses: 1. away' if the referent is static, or 2. an 'along' meaning if it is moving.\
\\xv Yibalderrehmen!\
\\xe Move over! [so there\'92s room for me to squeeze in].\
\\xv Nungka balwam kore mankabo bu dungyibmiyibmi darnki.\
\\xe He went to the river when it was almost sunset.\
\\xv Kundulk makkah kabalhdulkdarlkan.\
\\xe A stick is floating along down the river.\
\\xv Wanjh nawu duruk bokenh benebalwam benebolkyurrhkeng Oenpelli dja club manbu kahdi benebalwam benebolkyurrhkeng Community Store manbu kangeyyo Adjumarlarl Store.\
\\xv Then those two dogs kept going past Oenpelli, they passed the place where the club is now, then they went on and passed the place where the community store is, the one called Adjumarlarl Store.\
\\so Andrew Manakgu, Injalak Arts painting documentation, Adjumarllarl and Omwarl Story\
\\id DK, MG, entered into master file 06/Sep/2016\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx bala\
\\ps adv. pref.\
\\ng can function as an adverbial classifier\
\\ge flat\
\\re flat, elongate\
\\de flat, elongate\
\\se balayo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge lie.flat\
\\re lie flat, horizontally (of flat or elongate objects)\
\\de lie flat, horizontally (of flat or elongate objects)\
\\se baladjabdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge standing.tall\
\\re stand vertically (of flat or elongate objects)\
\\de stand vertically (of flat or elongate objects)\
\\xv Nawu karndakidj an-kole an-kodjdjekurrmi wardi bu baladjabdiwirrinj bu bangmeyurrhkuyuwirrinj, kun-kange ba-kange... ba-bangniwirrinj kunj. Dja arri-kolekurrmi an-wurrk arri-nami ya arri-kolekurrmi kanjdji borndok an-kole ku-kurlk balayoy bu an-wurrk arri-yikani wardi anbu ba-djabdiwirrinj an-kole ngarri-kurrmeninj ba-kangedarrmeninj yirridjdja nawu bininj nakka, nungka kunj ka-bengkan rowk ba-kangebabanghni 'O ka-kangebabang maitbi Bininj kabarri-re' ba-yimi barri-nami. An-kole arri-kurrmi bu arri-yoy malahmalaywi, nakka yirridjdja yi-bengkan marrngkidj Ubarr nawu o lorrkkon. Yirridjdja na-kudji duwa ngad na-warre kalkberd. Yiman laik kordang marrngkidj bu bad najing nakka yirridjdja yiman Bininj. Yiman ngarri-yime 'Oh djad kunj bi-rredjdjudmeng kabi-dedjdjudme anbu an-kole arri-djabname. Ka-re balay.\
\\xe As for the antilopine kangaroo, spears which were going to be used to hunt them had to be placed flat on the ground because if they were stood upright, if they stood up straight before being used to hunt the kangaroos, the animal would sense the presence of humans and become strong and powerful. If we were placing spears to be used in a kangaroo fire drive, we would put those spears down flat together with the spear thrower on the ground, when we were going off to do a kangaroo fire drive. If we were to put the spears upright in the camp, then the mind of the kangaroo would be alerted because fi:yirridjdja moiety kangaroos are like humans. Those kangaroos know everything about our intentions and can think 'Oh I feel energy welling up in my body, there must be humans coming.' When we camped the night before the kangaroo fire drive, [we would be mindful of the fact that] those fi:yirridjdja moiety kangaroos are associated with the Ubarr and the Lorrkkon ceremonies and have spiritual power. That's the case for fi:yirridjdja moiety kangaroos. But the fi:duwa moiety kangaroos, our moiety [speaker is fi:duwa moiety], they are not powerful like that. fi:Yirridjdja moiety kangaroos are like 'clever men', like human witch doctors. We would say things like this, 'that kangaroo has been [metaphorically] jabbed in the rump by a spear [which was not placed flat on the ground] and it will move away to a distant place now.'\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx balabbala\
\\ps n.\
\\ge platform\
\\re platform\
\\re table\
\\de sleeping platform, table\
\\xv Yo fi:maitbi barri-djurle.... njamed barri-marnbom balabbala. \
\\xe Maybe they built a shade..... whatsit, they put up a platform there [explaining why there are rock paintings so high up in the shelter].\
\\cf kukbalabbala\
\\ce flat\
\\bw from Makassarese fi:balla?-balla? 'cottage, small house; couch'.\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balad\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clay\
\\re clay type\
\\de whiteish to grey clay found on the surface of plains and open country\
\\xv Balad ka-kurlkbame kun-kurlk ngurrurdu ka-ngun kabi-kombukyiwe\
ka-re wanjh kukku ka-bongun.\
\\xe fv:Balad is a light coloured clay that emus eat and it makes them thirsty so they go\
and drink after eating it.\
\\xv Balad, kabbal ku-rorrbo karri-ngalke, ka-bame.\
\\xe fv:Balad is found on plains and open places and it is a light-coloured (clay).\
\\ee This clay appears to be an important part of emu diet.\
\\sd geographic\
\\so LBN, Language of Land workshop December 2005\
\\dt 22/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx baladj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge leech\
\\re leech\
\\de leech\
\\xv Baladj nga-kengemen wardi ngan-kurlbayakwon.\
\\xe I'm frightened of leeches, they might finish up my blood.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx baladj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clearing\
\\re cleared area, open space with no vegetation\
\\de clearing or space which has been cleared of vegetation\
\\xv Ka-ngolnan ka-borledborledme ka-ngolnan wanjh konda ka-rrabukurrme ku-baladj. \
\\xe She looks at the clouds and then circles around, looks up at the clouds and then lays her egg in the clearing.\
\\sd geographic\
\\sy rorrbono, bolkbaladj\
\\uv W, Djnj\
\\dt 22/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx baladjabdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.vertical\
\\re stand in vertical position\
\\re vertical\
\\de stand up elongate object in a vertical orientation\
\\xv Nawu karndakidj an-kole an-kodjdjekurrmi wardi bu baladjabdiwirrinj bu bangmeyurrhkuyuwirrinj, kun-kange\
ba-kange ba-bangniwirrinj kunj dja arri-kolekurrmi an-wurrk arri-nami ya arri-kolekurrmi kanjdji borndok an-kole\
ku-kurlk barlayoy bu an-wurrk arri-yikani.\
\\xe For hunting antilopine kangaroos, spears had to be stored flat on the ground [the day before hunting] otherwise if they were stood up\
vertically [leaning against something], if they were up straight before the hunt then the kangaroo would sense our presence and become\
powerful and aware of our presence and so when conducting fire drives, the day beforehand the spears had to be placed flat on the\
ground together with the spear throwers\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx baladjabname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge place.upright\
\\re place upright\
\\de place elongate object upright e.g. spears against a tree\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx baladjdji\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bag\
\\re bag\
\\re sack\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de bag, string bag or cloth bag\
\\xv Nga-kebkan mayh kure Barlbbanarra wanjh Barlbbanarra kang duruk, duruk kang djalbom mayh kalawan bom bom bom bom bom bom nangahnang bag baladjdji djerrh, djerrh ngorrkang wanjh kam-wam wilkdi, na-wernwarre. \
\\xe 'I'm taking the dogs hunting to Barlbbanarra', and so he took the dogs to Barlbbanarra and killed lots of game, goannas, here there and everywhere looking for game and then into the bag, the string bag [he placed them] and then carried it on his shoulder and came to\
roast [the meat]. It was the elder brother [who did this].\
\\bw from Makassarese fi:balase 'sack, bag'\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balak\
\\sn 1\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge marked.register\
\\re mother-in-law respect register\
\\de lexical replacement affinal kin respect register which is used with one's actual fv:ngal-kurrng (spouse's mother and her sisters) and\
fv:na-kurrng (spouse's mother's brothers)\
\\sy kun-kurrng\
\\sy kun-binjbalak, kun-mikme\
\\sn 2\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ge mother-in-law\
\\re mother-in-law\
\\de mother-in-law\
\\un The usual term reference for 'mother-in-law' is fv:ngal-binjbalak\
\\sy ngal-binjbalak, ngal-binjkurrng\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balakbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge give.away.daughter\
\\re give away daughter in marriage\
\\de give daughter in marriage\
\\xv Ngal-kurrng ngan-balakbun. 'Ngayi won daluk,' ka-yime.\
\\xe (My) cousin (MMBDD) will give me her daughter in marriage. She'll say, 'I'll give the girl to you.'\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balanda\
\\ps n. \
\\sn 1\
\\ge non-Aboriginal\
\\re non-Aboriginal person\
\\de person of non-Aboriginal descent\
\\un The original sense of this word is 'person of European descent' but it is sometimes used in contexts where the referent does not  fall\
into the category of 'European'.\
\\sy kukbele\
\\uv I, W, E\
\\ur Djnj= wadjbala\
\\sn 2\
\\pr (kun-)\
\\ge English\
\\re English (language)\
\\de English language\
\\ng The prefix fv:kun- is optional.\
\\xv Yoh, yoh kunekke ngarri-yime 'barrkid'. O yika kabirri-yime 'na-karriken', karriken. Na-karriken nakka kureh,\
ka-rrungyibme. Yo baleh bu Balanda ka-yime? Western! Karri, yiman kabirri-yime yiman karri-yime 'karrikad' fi:well\
nani bininj na-karriken.\
\\xe Yes, yes, that's right we say fi:barrkid people [to refer to the people of the Kakadu region]. Or sometimes we use the word 'na-karriken'\
or 'karriken' [literally 'westerners']. That word means the sunset people.How would you say that in English? Western! And we say\
fi:karri or fi:karrikad 'west'. Well that's what na-karriken means, 'the westerners'.\
\\bw from Macassarese, fi:Hollander\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx balanh-\
\\va barlanh-\
\\ps adv. pref.\
\\de \'91Almost\'92, \'91nearly happened but didn\'92t\'92, \'91be about to\'92. When prefixed to the verb to get fv:balanhmang the meaning is \'91let go of, lose control of, fail to take hold of\'92. In Kune it can appear as a free form. Synonymous with fv:kuyin-.\
\\xv Ngalkudji bikebbadjdji mandjad la ngalbuyika ngalbu bibalanhbom, wanjh djalwohmankang.\
\\xe He hit one woman hard, straight in the face. He almost hit the other one, but she fainted with fright and fell down. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 132\
\\xv Ngad ngarrikarrme mankare mankarre kerrngekenh wanjh ngarribalanhmang.\
\\xe We have the old law from the very beginning but we are letting it go [losing it].\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 260\
\\xv Nganbalanhkebdoy.\
\\xe He nearly punched me.\
\\xv Balanh ngangarkmeninj.\
\\xe I almost drowned. (E)\
\\id DK, updated MG, entered into master file 06/Sep/2016\
\\dt 14/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx balang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re male subsection name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\xv Barrk djukerre. Nakka duwa Balang. Balang Belinj. \
\\xe The black wallaroos are of the fi:duwa moiety and the male is Balang subsection and the female is Belinj.\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W, Kdj= na-ngarridj\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Balawurru\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Estate name in the Deaf Adder Creek region.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx balay\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge far\
\\re far\
\\de far, a long way\
\\xv La name nawaran yi-ngeybun wardi ka-ngeybekkan bonj ngun-bawon ka-re kelekele. Namekke. Kuk-kelekele namekke.\
Nawaran. Ngun-bekkan. Kun-wok ka-bekkan. Yiman bininj nakka, kun-wok ka-karrme. Ka-ngeybekkan nawu balay\
ka-ngimen nawu kururrk cave munguyhmunguyh marrek mak ngarr-ngalke.\
\\xe If you utter the name of the Oenpelli python [when hunting it] then it will be too late and it will leave you behind and go off in fear.\
That's it. It is a very timid animal the Oenpelli python. It can hear your speech. It is like a human and has its own language. It can hear\
its name and will take off a long way and go inside a cave and you'll never find it.\
\\uv E, Djnj, W\
\\ur I= djarre\
\\sy djarre\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Balbalk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\re place name\
\\de Place in the Ankung Djang estate on the upper Liverpool River near Kabulwarnamyo Outstation. The focus of the site is a small seasonal rivulet that flows to the Kabulwarnamyo spring.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 10/Dec/2014\
\
\\lx Balbbe Karri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place\
\\re placename\
\\de place near the confluence of Kudjaldordo creek and the Liverpool River near Mumeka outstation\
\\en duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx baleh\
\\va bale\
\\sn 1\
\\ps pron.\
\\ge where\
\\re where\
\\de where\
\\xv Ngudda baleh yih-di?\
\\xe Where have you been?\
\\xv Bale mani?\
\\xe Which one.\
\\xv Birri-buyika minj bale mane birri-bebmeninj, bonj birri-ruy birri-doweng birri-dukkarrukkarrinj.\
\\xe Some of the others had no where to get away and so in the end were burned, writhing to death.\
\\uv W, I, E\
\\ur Kdj= ayedkah, ngayedkah\
\\sn 2\
\\ge what\
\\re what\
\\de what\
\\xv Maladj, baleh ngundih-marneyimeng? Oh ngandih-kaybom nga-marrewedowen nga-rrowen .\
\\xe Maladj, what did they say to you? Oh, they refused to give me any [food]. Now I'm really starving.\
\\xv Bale ka-yime?\
\\xe What's (s)he saying?\
\\xv Minj baleh karri-yime?\
\\xe There's nothing we can do. [or] What can we possibly do/say?\
\\se (m)an-bale\
\\ge what\
\\re what\
\\de what\
\\un an infrequent variant form\
\\xv ngune-karrngko ngune-ngimen kandi-marnekarwon\
ngune-karrngko ngune-ngimen kandi-marnekarwon\
konda nuk an-baleh kabani-yime\
\\xe You two [my brother and my wife] go inside and chase it out [the rock ringtail-possum]. What the heck are those two doing in there?  [text of\
akun-borrk song by David Karlbuma]\
\\sn 3\
\\ge how\
\\re how\
\\de how\
\\xv Baleh man-berlnginj ka-yime yi-wayini?\
\\xe How do you use the clapsticks [what is the rhythm] to accompany yourself when you sing [this song]?\
\\xv Bale nga-yimiwon?\
\\xe How do I do this?\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balekeno\
\\ps adv.\
\\ge when\
\\re when\
\\de when\
\\xv 'Ngudda nuk yim-bebmen yim-ray nuk yi-mulewan balekeno kam-durndeng, balekeno kam-durndeng, balekeno\
kam-durndeng nakka nuk wam nuk wam nuk mungburrinj.'\
\\xe Come out here then, come and tell, when will he return, when will he return [etc]. Maybe he has gone and will never return [text of a\
kun-borrk song by Kevin Djimarr].\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balem\
\\pr kun-\
\\va balemno\
\\ps n.\
\\de fat, oil\
\\xv Bininj marrek karri-kayburren kayakki, ngurrurdu na-djamun djarran dadno, kun-balem njalehnjale mobalhno\
konhda yi-mobalhdjobke yi-mobalhdjobke yi-yunjmang rowk wanjh yi-benkanjwon nawu Bininj na-wern.\
\\xe We don't  refuse to share [meat] with others, no, because emus are sacred and so the legs, the fat and whatever else, the upper legs, here\
where you cut the top of the leg and pull out all the sinews and muscle and then you distribute the meat to everybody.\
\\sd body part\
\\se balemkimukmen\
\\ge increase.fat\
\\re increase in fat\
\\de increase fat content\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balen\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bee\
\\re bee \
\\de stingless honey bees\
\\sc Tetragonula spp.\
\\uv E\
\\uv I, W, Djnj= bod, bodno\
\\xv Kabirri-djuhme balen ka-wernmen.\
\\xe They get into the water and the bees will increase in number. [i.e. a ceremonial increase ritual].\
\\sd insects\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Balen Djarng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re placename\
\\de Estate name south of Buluh Kaduru and north-east of Korlobidahdah along the middle Cadell River. Honey bee fv:modjarnh dreaming increase site.\
\\en duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Balhbengorrhyi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re placename\
\\de place at the intersection of the Yikarrakkal and Mankorlod outstation roads\
\\en duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de close or block off\
\\xv Kun-ngol mimbalhmeng dird.\
\\xe The clouds have blocked the moon.\
\\pdn -balhbonghme\
\\se dangbalhme\
\\ge close.door\
\\re close door or entrance\
\\de close door or block off an entrance\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balhmiyindi\
\\ps v.i. (persistive)\
\\re be blocked off\
\\de Be blocked off, based on the transitive verb fv:balhme \'91to block off\'92 but now the place blocked off is the subject.\
\\xv Birri-nang ka-balhmiyindi birri-durndi kured. Bindi-marnemulewam, \'93Nakka birri-rurrkbalhmeng ngarri-nang\'94\
\\xe They saw that it was blocked up, and went home, telling them (their family): "We've seen that they've blocked up the cave".\
\\dt 17/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx balhngun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge fuck\
\\re fuck\
\\de fuck\
\\xv Nungka boywek. Bu marneyime karri-re kan-nan la kan-kadjung kan-balhngun!\
\\xe That's the knob-tailed gecko. If I say to you 'well let's go' then he sees us and follows us and fucks us!\
\\se dedjbalhngun\
\\ge sodomise\
\\re sodomise\
\\de sodomise\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Bali\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re placename\
\\de place in Benebenemdi estate, Cadell River district\
\\uv E\
\\en duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balinjdja\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Vitex_acuminata (tree)\
\\de kind of tree (7-15m) with edible purple-black fruit\
\\xv Djabbo ka-ngun an-balinjdja. Bininj karri-ngun, djabbo nuye duninj anekke an-balinjdja.\
\\xe The quoll eats the black plum. People eat it (too) but it really belongs to the quoll.\
\\sc Vitex acuminata\
\\sy an-dedjbang\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 30/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx balkbu\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge digging.stick\
\\re digging stick\
\\de Digging stick, an implement associated with women.\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= kunkanin, Djnj= djadjno\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx balmardbarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge brown.tree.snake\
\\re brown tree snake\
\\re fi:Boiga_irregularis\
\\de Brown tree snake.\
\\sc Boiga irregularis\
\\xv Balmardbarra ku-wardde ka-warlkkarren ka-bebme ka-komwayhme.\
\\xe The brown tree snake hides in the rocks and when it comes out it lifts its neck up high.\
\\sy ramberambe\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balmarded\
\\ps interj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge jokeINTERJ\
\\re redressive interjection used in joking relationships\
\\de a third party response after hearing someone swear in jest or joke about one's brother, uncle/aunt, or niece/nephew but is also used by\
the person being sworn at or teased, the effect is to acknowledge the use of joking relationship language\
\\xv X: Nani nga-nang munguyh ben-yawam, matress kurrmeng ben-yawam. Y: Pay yimeng $500 bu yi-benkurrmeng\
matress!  X: Yimen 'balmarded' pay yimeng $1000 bedberre, kornkumo, la ngalbadjan $1000! Z: Balmarded!\
\\xe  X: [to Z] I've seen him he's always looking for them [women], he puts the matress [in readiness] and goes off in search. Y:You'd have\
to pay $500 to put anyone on a matress! [To Z overhearing] Say Balmarded! X: [again to Y] You'd have to pay $1000 to the father and\
mother, $1000! Z: Balmarded!\
\\sn 2\
\\ge INTERJ\
\\re sister reference addressive interjection\
\\de redressive interjection used when a male hears mention or accidently mentions something related to his sister, actal or classificatory\
\\xv 'Kayakki, manu yi-kukwakwan dedjnjengh!' Ka-rrowen Bulanj. B:'Yeah yi-kukwakwan andehne barrih-yikuknayi'. C:\
Yeah yi-mayol ngudda. Ngal-kodjok, Wamuddjan balmarded. D: 'O nga-kuknan ba yi-bimbu!'  C: 'Men, kaluk bad\
marnebimbun yi-kuknan.'\
\\xe Ngal-kodjok: 'Oh you wouldn't know what it looks like fi:dedjnjengh.' Hey Bulanj's laughing. B: 'Yeah, you haven't got a clue what it\
looks like, this thing they saw. C: You're a stupid Mayol Ngal-kodjok, Wamuddjan (oops sorry for mentioning my sister). D: 'Oh I\
want to see what it looks like, you paint it for me!' C: 'You wait, I'll paint it and you'll see!'\
\\nt Context of above text: Speaker has created a fictional dialogue for a number of characters to explain how contact rock art was created\
(e.g. images of ships). Someone who had travelled from the Arnhem Land plateau to the coast saw a ship and returned to tell kinsmen\
of this strange thing. Not being believed, he paints a picture on the wall of the shelter to illustrate what he has seen.\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx balmed\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Planchonella.spp.\
\\re fi:Planchonella_pohlmaniana\
\\de kind of stone country habitat small tree (5-8m) with fleshy 2-3cm globular edible fruit which appears in the dry season\
(July-December)\
\\ee Black wallaroos also eat this fruit when it falls to the ground and the area under these trees is often cleared by black wallaroos\
searching for the fruit.\
\\sc Planchonella pohlmaniana\
\\uv I, Kdj\
\\sn 2\
\\re fi:Planchonella_arnhemica\
\\de kind of tree\
\\xv An-bedde, la an-djimed an-balmed ka-ngun mimno ka-ngun.\
\\xe Quinine tree, and fi:Planchonella_pohlmaniana,_Planchonella_arnhemica. It [emu] eats the seeds of those.\
\\sc Planchonella arnhemica\
\\uv I, Kdj\
\\uv Djnj =an-djimed\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Balngarra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a number of fi:duwa moiety patriclans, Rembarrnga and Kune speaking.\
\\xv Na-mekke nganeh-durren. Ngane-durrinj ngane-wam kure na-wu na-ni na-buyika na-Balngarra. 'Na-kurrngh, yim-ray \
ngarre, ngarr-burriwe ngarre'. \
\\xe Me and this other fellow swear at each other [in a joking relationship]. We swear at each other and once we both went (together), me and that other fellow, a Balngarra clansman. [He said to me] 'Let's go and throw [spears]."\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so Mick Kubarkku\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bambara\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge head\
\\re head (fi:kun-kurrng register)\
\\de head\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-kodj\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bambarr\
\\va man-bambarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fire.drive.valley\
\\re fire drive valley or gully\
\\de dead end valley or narrow gully which are the sites chosen for fire drives to trap kangaroos which become trapped and injured by fire\
and can then be easily speared\
\\xv Makka ngarri-di manekke kunj yiman ba kah-re man-bambarr ka-bidbun, yah\
ngarri-yame.\
\\xe We stand there in them (the gullies) and if the kangaroos go up the narrow gully then we spear them.\
\\ee This landscape term encodes an anthropogenic affordance, i.e. the suitablility of the landform for the conducting of macropod fire\
drives.\
\\ng The prefix fv:(m)an- is optional\
\\sd geographic\
\\sd fire\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bambidj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Falco.berigora\
\\re Falco_berigora\
\\re brown falcon\
\\de ceremonial name of fv:karrkkanj the brown falcon\
\\sc Falco berigora\
\\ee The brown falcon is an important totem in the fv:lorrkkon hollow log ossuary ceremony. The name fv:bambidj refers to a brown falcon totem which belongs to men of the fv:bulanj subsection. Public songs are performed in the camp for a number of nights and then the\
men and young initiates retire to a secret camp on the final few nights of the ceremony. One public song in the fv:lorrkkon ceremony which mentions this ceremonial name of the brown falcon (and sung to the accompaniment of pairs of boomerang clapsticks) has the\
following text: |fv\{Bambidj korna, bambidjko, yawanjh korna yawanjhko\}\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bambirl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge echidna\
\\re echidna\
\\de echidna\
\\sc Tachyglossus aculeatus\
\\uv W\
\\ur I, E= ngarrbek, Djnj= kowarrang\
\\un Although the name fv:bambirl is more commonly used by Kunwinjku speakers, fv:ngarrbek is also a common synonym.\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Bambirl Kayarlarrdong\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\xv Bambirl Kayarlarrdong darnki Njanjma Borrkkeng.\
\\xe Bambirl Kayarlarrdong is close to Njanjma Borrkkeng.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx bambu\
\\va ba bu\
\\ps conj.\
\\ge CONJ\
\\re so that\
\\de So that. Connected form of fv:ba_bu.\
\\xv Ngun-bukkan kun-wok bambu yi-kurrmen.\
\\xe He'll teach you the language so you can put it (write it) down.\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bambubbu\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge forehead\
\\re forehead (fi:kun-kurrng register)\
\\de forehead\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-milh\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bamburruh\
\\pr an-\
\\va bamburruhno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge hollow.branch\
\\re hollow branch of tree\
\\de dead or dessicated branch or branch stump of a tree which has become hollow\
\\ee These kind of branches are where honey hives are often found.\
\\xv Yi-marnbu: yi-ray kun-re:d bamburruhno yi-yakwo:, Ngabba kan-bekkan, an-kung\
ngan-bekkan, yi-ray bamburrhno yi-ngarnma, an-wodjwarre, an-wodjkimuk yi-ma nabiwo\
yi-bebmen, yi-djal-yakwo nga-djare, yi-ma rowk ngan-kung kabarri-ngun wurdurd.\
\\xe [Calling out to ancestors:] Creat it now [honey], keep going through all the country! Make honey in all  the broken hollow branches;\
finish them right up. Father listen to me, place your hand into all the hollow branches, the good logs and rotten ones, get them all and\
fv:nabiwo [honey type] you come out, you finish filling them all, that's what I want, get them all so the children can eat honey.\
\\xv Nabiwo ka-rri ku-bamburruh.\
\\xe fv:Nabiwo honey is found in dried out hollow tree stumps.\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bamrdek\
\\va bamdurek\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge norther.snapping.turtle\
\\re northern snapping turtle\
\\re snapping turtle\
\\re fi:Elseya_dentata\
\\de Northern snapping turtle.\
\\sc Elseya dentata\
\\sd reptiles\
\\sn 2\
\\ge saw-shelled turtle\
\\re saw-shelled turtle\
\\re fi:Myuchelys_latersternum\
\\de Saw-shelled turtle. These tiny little turtles are associated with fv:ngalyod the rainbow serpent and their saw-edged shells are believed to be able to drill down into the rock where fv:ngalyod lives in her subterranean burrow.\
\\sy dedjdjinhdjinh\
\\sc Myuchelys latersternum\
\\sd reptiles\
\\dt 10/Mar/2014\
\
\\lx bamdjelk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge circumcised.boy\
\\re circumcised boy (term of reference)\
\\de a term of reference for a circumcised boy or young man\
\\se kodjok bamdjelk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge prop.n.\
\\re mythical being\
\\de mythological spirit being that lives in pandanus groves and thrusts its pelvis back and forward in a\
sexual manner against pandanus trees. Kodjok Bamdjelk is said to have multiple penes which spin\
around like propellers.\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bamdjen\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_torulosa\
\\de kind of Acacia tree\
\\sc Acacia torulosa\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur Djnj= an-mardamarda, an-morrbo\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bame\
\\va barme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge shine\
\\re shine with bright colour or brightness, glisten\
\\de see fv:barme\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bamedjak\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ge Grevillea.formosa\
\\re fi:Grevillea_formosa\
\\de Grevillea shrub with green to yellow flowers.\
\\sc Grevillea formosa\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 08/Mar/2014\
\
\\lx bamkarnamalkmalk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spinifex pigeon\
\\re pigeon, spinifex\
\\re spinifex pigeon\
\\re fi:Geophaps_plumifera\
\\de Pigeon which lives in rocky habitats and has a crest. The records show that spinifex pigeons are rarely seen on the northern parts of the Arnhem Land plateau but the fact that older speakers know of them may suggest that their range has changed or is restricted to southern parts of the plateau.\
\\et fv:bamkarnamalkmalk *bam is an archaic form for 'head'\
\\xv Rakul kukbuyika, kuwardde karri wanjh bamkarnamalkmalk, warddeken kudjambudda, djilinkuyeng kodjmudno nawu.\
\\xe The ordinary partridge pigeon is different. The spinifex pigeon lives in the rock country, it's a rock dweller on the flat rocky platforms and has a longer crest, with a feather on its head.\
\\sd bird\
\\so LBN 11/Jun/2006\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= kodjkarnamalkmalk\
\\sc Geophaps plumifera\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bamo\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\va bamono\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable\
\\sn 1\
\\ge pod\
\\re seed pod\
\\de seed pod of a tree or shrub, especially eucalypts, acacias and the cup-shaped woody capsules of Melaleuca fruit.\
\\xv Ya, makka an-djalen ka-ngun djamadobdob bamano dja mani an-djalen djamadobdob arri-ngeybun bamano an-bamo\
kanjdji mimno djamadobdob.\
\\xe Yes, emus eat the seeds from the gum nuts of fi:Eucalyptus_miniata which we call fi:djamadobdob, like from this fi:Eucalyptus_miniata\
tree here, there are seeds inside the pods.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge bud\
\\re flower bud\
\\re bud (of flowers)\
\\de flower bud\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, I, E\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bamobakke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr bamo 'bud'+ bakke 'break'\
\\ge break.flower.bud\
\\re break flower bud\
\\re break seed pod\
\\de break off a flower bud or seed pod\
\\xv Ya man-murlmu ka-kobun, man-murlmu ka-kobun kaddum ka-bidbun ku-rrulk ka-kongun. Kono ka-ngun ka-re\
ka-bamobakke \
\\xe When the fi:Melaleuca_leucadendra paperbarks are flowering, it [the Oenpelli python] climbs up the tree and breaks off the flower\
buds.\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, I, E\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bamobebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge produce.seed.capsule\
\\re produce seed capsule\
\\de the appearance of a seed pod on certain plants (eucalypts, some acacias and melaleucas)\
\\sy -bamowe\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bamowe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge produce.seed.capsule\
\\re produce seed capsule\
\\de (of plants) to produce a seed pod\
\\xv Ka-bamowe kono ba-rradjmeng wanjh ka-bamobebme.\
\\xe When (a tree) produces a seed pod, it finishes flowering and then the seed pod appears.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bananame\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge crackle\
\\re crackling of fire\
\\de crackling of a fire\
\\sd fire\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx banangarrhbanangarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge shooting.star\
\\re shooting star\
\\de supernatural being similar to fv:namorrorddo\
\\xv Banangarrhbanangarr ka-birlikan.\
\\xe The fv:banangarrhbanangarr being carries light.\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Banarlum\
\\ps n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re placename\
\\de place in Djalama clan region\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bandirrang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge flag\
\\re flag used to mark a grave\
\\de flag flown over a new grave.\
\\bw from Makassarese fi:bendera 'flag'.\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Bandjibandji\
\\cf See fv:Bankibanki\
\
\\lx bani-\
\\ps v. pref.\
\\ge 3duP\
\\re third person dual past pronominal verbal prefix, Kundjeyhmi and Kundedjnjenghmi dialects\
\\de Third person dual past pronominal verbal prefix.\
\\uv Kdj, Djnj\
\\dt 10/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx banikin\
\\ps n.\
\\de Enamel metal cup or mug, \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
pannikin.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\xv Djakku kakan banikin bele, kabiwon Nabulanj.\
\\xe Lefty [nickname] is carrying a white pannikin, he\'92s going to give it to Nabulanj. \
\\so \'91Lesson 13: Djurra \'91L\'92\'92, \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Oenpelli Literature Production Centre\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \\bw from English \'91\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
pannikin\'92\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx Baningukberlhberlhbuni\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on the far upper Mann River (Mayali-Jawoyn mix area) which is a fv:djang relating to a traditional narrative about two dingoes who dragged the guts of a male euro along the Mann River downstream to this site where they entered the ground as dreaming totems. The name literally means 'those two were attacking the guts'.\
\\xv Dalkken ba-bobayi kunj. Kunj ba-bobayi anbu arri-yime Baningukberlhberlhbuni an-kabobarli. Kumekke ka-bolkngeyyo Baningukberlhberlbuni kanjdjidjam Ngukdjordborrhborrh kaddum Bornawulu. Kaddum ka-re Kabornayehyenan ankodjbang ankuken dalak ngukno.\
\\xe The dingoes bit a kangaroo (which represents the river). They bit the kangaroo at Baningukberlhberlhbuni where the river is crooked. That's where it is called Baningukberlhberlbuni. Ngukdjordborrhborrh is downstream and Bornawulu is upstream.\
\
\\lx Bankibanki\
\\va Bandjibandji\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region\
\\de Site on Magela Creek, around 10km east-southeast of Jabiru airport. Was inhabited in the early 1980s by Frank Djandjul.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 31/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx bang\
\\pr na-\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr birri- etc\
\\ps adj.\
\\de dangerous, wild, violent\
\\xv Birrih-bang.\
\\xe Wild people (violent or quick to anger).\
\\xv Kundjikurdubuk djang kun-djak na-bang.\
\\xe The sickness dreaming site at Kundjikurdubuk is dangerous.\
\\xv Kururrkkurduk duninjh kunbolk. Kaddum wanjkih arri-koluy Barlmurrng Kawarleyo arri-bomey, wanjh Nabodmebarnko nakka ngalengarre barlmurrng djang, borom nawu dadbe na-bang, kan-baye,... barlmurrng, dadbe nawu karrih-yime.\
\\xe But really Kururrkkurduk is the place. Further upstream is Barlmurrng Kawarleyo where we went down to draw water and at Nabodmebarnko there is the wasp dreaming place. That wasp is analogous to a king brown snake, that wasp, it bites us and is dangerous. That's what we say.\
\\rd -bahbang\
\\se (m)an-bang\
\\va bangno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge poison\
\\re poisonous food \
\\re inedible food which is strong tasting, burning, bitter or toxic\
\\de food that is either poisonous or 'cheeky', i.e. leaves a burning sensation in the mouth or is very strong in taste (salty, bitter, too sweet, too much chilli etc).\
\\xv Manu kari yi-kurrmeng man-bang ngan-djenbom.\
\\xe This curry powder you put [in the food] is so powerful it has burnt my tongue.\
\\sn 2\
\\re poisonous substance\
\\de toxic or dangerous substance\
\\xv Yikahwi Wadjbala nawu fi:scientist kabirri-nahnan anbu man-bang ngarre fi:uranium ba minj ka-yalarrme kure kukku dja kukurlk dja kure mayh dja ngad bininj. \
\\xe Some non-Aboriginal scientists are looking out to make sure that the poison in uranium does not spread into the water, soil, animals or we humans.\
\\se kun-bang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge alcohol\
\\re alcoholic beverage\
\\de alcoholic beverage, grog\
\\xv Ngane-dirri burldebol fi:jukebox ngane-bekkang ngane-wam ngane-bayahmeng kun-bang.\
\\xe We played pool and we both listened to the jukebox and then we went and bought some beer.\
\\pdn kk = -mari\
\\se ngudjbang\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge powerful\
\\re powerful\
\\de powerful\
\\xv Yika Bininj kabirri-yime dalkken kaben-baye kunj, yika larrk. Birri-ngudjbang kunj na-warddeken, minj bale ka-yime\
bu dalkken kaben-ngudjkadjung ku-wardde, kayakki, kabirri-ngudjbawon kunj.\
\\xe Some people say that dingoes can sometimes kill rock kangaroos too and sometimes they can't. The rock-wallabies are too fast, making it difficult for the dingoes to get them amongst the rocks as the wallabies are too fast for them.\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangam\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge stone\
\\re stone, rock\
\\re rock, stone\
\\de stone, rock\
\\sn 2\
\\de money\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-wardde, kun-bad\
\\se kun-bangahbangam\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rock.country\
\\re rock country (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de escarpment, rocky outcrop\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-warddewardde.\
\\sd geographic\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangardi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku matri-moiety\
\\xv Aa Bangardi bimbom bu ngabbard ngan-bimbukkang Bangardi ngayiken na-djorrorlam \
\\xe There are paintings by a man of Bangardi subsection which my father showed me, Bangardi, a man related to me of Djorrorlom clan. \
\\so JK\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W= fv:na-kamarrang, Kdj= na-kamarrang\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangardi\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\xv Na-bangardi nangalayngu nakka kah-di Namokardabu na-Born, ku-bolkborn Kunrorre Kalurlhdi. Kumekke djenj\
ngarri-re, yika Midjuyh ngarri-re warridj.\
\\xe Na-bangardi, our uncle (you are my brother) he lives at Namokardabu, a man of the Born clan, and that place Kunrorre Kalurlhdi is for\
the Born clan. We always go there for fishing and sometimes we go fishing at Midjuyh there too. \
\\sd kinship\
\\so Timothy Nadjowh\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= fv:kamarrang\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangardi\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr al-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\uv W= ngal-bangardi, Kdj= al-bangardi\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= fv:kamanj\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangardidjan\
\\va ngal-kamarrang, al-kamarrang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection name (female) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku matri-moiety\
\\xv Manbulu Karri ngalengarre Bangardidjan ngal-Marrirn].\
\\xe Manbulu Karri (a place) belongs to her, Bangardidjan of the Marrirn clan.\
\\sd kinship\
\\so Kevin Buluwana\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= fi:ngal-kamarrang, E, Djnj=fv:bangirn, E (synonym)=bang\'9crn, Kdj= al-kamarrang\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangarnbangarn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fern\
\\re fern species\
\\de fern species, grows in sandstone country\
\\xv Bangarnbangarn kunj meno.\
\\xe The fi:bangarnbangarn fern is kangaroo food.\
\\uv E\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx banghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re draw on cigarette\
\\re suck\
\\de Draw or suck on cigarette or pipe when smoking tobacco. Suck liquid through a straw.\
\
\\lx bangkam\
\\ps n.\
\\ge brahminy.kite\
\\re brahminy kite\
\\de brahminy kite\
\\xv Marlbbarrdji kare Makabbirn, Morlng, karrkad ka-yo, karrkad ka-rri. Kuni Marlbbarrdji ka-lobme Bangkam ka-rri,\
nanih ka-re, Bangkam ngukdi kunwardde kamkang, nanih ka-yo ka-wurlebme, bale ka-re ka-bun, kabbala ka-re\
ka-bun, manih karri-re fs:one_side. Djang konda kun-wardde. \
\\xe Marlbbarrdji clan country continues to Makabbirn, Morlng, which is further inland. It continues to the Brahminy Kite site where it\
there is a rock which it placed there representing its shit and boats that come there can strike it so we have to keep to this side away\
from it. That rock is a sacred site.\
\\sc Milvus indus\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Bangkard-bangkard \uc0\u8232 \\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place name in Birrirddak Creek region.\
\\xv Kumekke ka-wukdurndeng Bangkard-bangkard, Djelkmerre ka-rrurndeng yikarrikadwi makkan Murrwan (Kanawulu, name of old person who was from there), doydoyh Kunnanj. \
\\xe Back from Bangkard-bangkard to Djelkmerre and further west it is Murrwan clan land. It belonged to Kanawulu, [my] fv:doydoyh \'91great-grandfather\'92 [from] Kunnanj.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\u8232 \\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx bangkerlebangkerle\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.platycarpa\
\\re fi:Acacia_platycarpa\
\\de kind of wattle tree or shrub, 3-7m high with cream to yellowish globular flowers\
\\sc Acacia platycarpa\
\\ee There is frequent misidentification and confusion between fi:Acacia_platycarpa and fi:Acacia_mimula because of the similarity in the flowers, fruit and habitat. Brock (2001) describes the main differences in the size (especially width) of the leaves, time of flowering and the texture of the bark. fi:Acacia_platycarpa is described as having 'bark: rough and grey to brown on trunk, smooth and whitish on upper branches' and 'phyllodes: alternate, smooth to slightly coarse, stiff, broad, curved, upper margin strongly curved and often wavy,\
blade 11-16cm x 3-6cm, dull grey-green, 3-4 prominent raised longitudinal veins joining towards base, rounded tip.' (Brock 2001:71). fi:Acacia_mimula on the other hand is described as 'bark:rough, grey, fibrous to tessellated' and 'pyllodes: smooth, elongated, curved to\
sickle-shaped, widest at middle, blade 8-15 cm x 1-3cm, dull green with 2-3 prominent longitudinal veins. fi:Acacia_platycarpa flowers from November to July whilst fi:Acacia_mimula only from April to June (Brock 2001:68).\
\\sy an-barrel, an-barrelk\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur E =karlbbo, Kdj= an-barrkkala\
\\p DSCN2944.jpg (in Djnj plants 3)\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bangkerreng\
\\ps n.\
\\ge season\
\\re late wet season\
\\de late wet season, the last rains of the wet season (April-May), 'knockemdowns' (late storms which 'knock down' the tall spear grass\
which has grown during the wet season)\
\\xv Nakka djal Bangkerreng. Ya anbedje ka-yawbardnjamedme... dabuno bu ka-yime! \
\\xe And in the late wet, mid dry season. When the spear grass has whatsit, bent over\'85he means the eggs [i.e. what time of year do emus\
lay eggs]\
\\sd weather\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangku\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mixed.descent\
\\re mixed Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal descent\
\\de person of mixed Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal descent\
\\bw From: from Makassarese fi:kayo_bangko 'mangrove sp., whose bark is used to boil trepang to give a red colour'.\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangme-\
\\ps aspectual prefix\
\\ge not.yet\
\\re not yet\
\\de not yet\
\\ng an aspectual prefix on verbs with the sense of 'before time in topic frame'\
\\xv Yun yi-bangmeyarlkilekme.\
\\xe Don't touch the (fishing) line yet.\
\\xv Nani ngah-bimbom ngarridjdjan marrek ngane-bangmemerrimeninj kayakki.\
\\xe When I made this bark painting Ngarridjdjan and I were not yet married.\
\\xv Nawu karndakidj an-kole an-kodjdjekurrmi wardi bu baladjabdiwirrinj bu bangmeyurrhkuyuwirrinj, kun-kange\
ba-kange ba-bangniwirrinj kunj dja arri-kolekurrmi an-wurrk arri-nami ya arri-kolekurrmi kanjdji borndok an-kole\
ku-kurlk balayoy bu an-wurrk arri-yikani.\
\\xe For hunting antilopine kangaroos, spears had to be stored flat on the ground [the day before hunting] otherwise if they were stood up\
vertically [leaning against something], if they were up straight beforehand [i.e. the day before the fire drive] then the kangaroos would \
become powerful and aware of our presence and so when conducting fire drives, the day beforehand the spears had to be placed flat on\
the ground together with the spear throwers.\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge become.violent\
\\re become aggressive, violent\
\\de become wild, aggressive, violent\
\\xv Kun-bang birri-bonguneng birri-bangminj wanjh.\
\\xe They drank alcohol and then they become violent\
\\pdn kk = -marimen\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bangno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge poison\
\\re poison\
\\de poison\
\\ng a variant form of fv:(m)an-bang\
\\xv Ngarri-djuhke wanjh ngarri-madbun bangno ka-yakmen.\
\\xe We put it in the water and wait until the poison is gone.\
\\xv Ka-bangbanj.\
\\xe The poison stinks.\
\\uv E, I\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bang\'9cn\
\\va bangirn, bang\'9crn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge skin.name\
\\re subsection name\
\\re skin name\
\\de Skin or subsection name for females in the fv:yirridjdja moiety. This is the Kune and Dalabon equivalent of fv:Bangardidjan.\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= bangardidjan, W= ngal-kamarrang, Djnj= bangirn\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx banj\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\ge odorous\
\\re smelly (i.e. exuding odour)\
\\re odorous\
\\de odorous (pleasant or malodorous)\
\\nt Takes predicate pronomianl and nominal prefixes. Whether a pleasant or malodorous sense is intended is inferred pragmatically. \
\\xv Njale yi-banj?\
\\xe What is that smell you are exuding?\
\\xv Ka-nguybanj.\
\\xe The flower has a fragrance.\
\\xv Yi-kukbanj.\
\\xe You stink!\
\\xv Ka-nudbanj.\
\\xe It's smells rotten.\
\\xv Ka-kordnudbanabanj\
\\xe It stinks of rotten shit all over the place [a description of the Maningrida sewerage pond].\
\\se man-banj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge smelly.food\
\\re food that has a strong smell\
\\de food that has a strong smell\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx banjdji\
\\ps n.\
\\re cross cousin in-law\
\\de Cross cousin who is considered an affine or potential affine e.g. brother-in-law, sister-in-law, MBD, MBS, MMBDS, MMBDD. Borrowed from Kriol, which in turn is borrowed from another Top End language (which one?). Used as term of reference and address.\
\\sy kanjok\
\\id DK\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx banjinhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge paint\
\\re paint, smear\
\\de paint, cover surface in ochre, smear with any viscous substance\
\\xv Karri-dokan kabbarrk karri-modme karri-banjinhmerren.\
\\pde Karri-re delek karri-mang karri-barurren.\
\\xe Let's go and get pipe-clay and paint ourselves.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde -barung.\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bard\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps n. pred.\
\\mr ka+bard '3sg+knee'\
\\ge standing\
\\re standing (of grass, bamboo)\
\\de stands (of grass)\
\\xv Konda ka-bard, konda ka-bard kondanj ka-nganjboke.\
\\xe Here the spear grass is standing, here the spear grass is standing, here it is coming into seed [the text of a fv:kun-borrk song by Kevin Djimarr].\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bard\
\\pr kun-\
\\va bardno\
\\ng incorporable\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge knee\
\\re knee\
\\de knee\
\\xv Kune ka-yime, ka-rrabuyo ku-burldjdjarn ka-rrabuyo dja kune ka-yime bardno ka-yo, kunih, bad dabuno fi:all_that\
ka-yo. Dabuno mani ka-yimeneh karreno. Ya an-darrkid ka-kolung ka-balhme. Marrek ka-nan namekke lalarl, bad\
ka-nome fi:djamtaem. \
\\xe He [male emu] lies down likes this, the eggs are in the middle and his knees lay down but all the eggs are laying there. The lower legs\
are on either side of the eggs. He puts his body down over the top to cover the eggs over. The black-breasted buzzard can't see them,\
but sometimes it can smell them.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge ocean.wave\
\\re ocean wave\
\\de ocean wave\
\\se (m)an-bard, bardno\
\\sn 3\
\\ps n.\
\\ge node\
\\re node on plant stem\
\\de Interstitial nodes on the stems of certain plants, especially grasses and bamboo.\
\\xv Dja arri-dadjkeyiwarre an-kole arri-bunjdjahwohdjahwoni arri-nani an-marneyurrhkuldi. Arri-rey 'lardarlarr' arri-dongi an-kole ba-bardwokdi kun-warddeyi 'koddowkkoddowk' arri-yimi. Wanjh arri-dongi. Kun-djelk arri-mangi\
'lerrelerrr' ba-rrongi bardno arri-dongi an-kole, wanjh arri-wokdi 'koddowkkoddowk' arri-yimi.\
\\xe And we cut bamboo spears, visiting the bamboo groves. We found the bamboo standing there up straight for us. When approaching the grove we would hit the bamboo stems with stones and the nodes would make a noise. We would call out fi:koddowkkoddowk [the name of the bar-shouldered dove who lives in the bamboo]. Then we would strike the bamboo. We would get gravel and throw it at the bamboo nodes and it would make a noise fi:lerrelerr and we would call out that pigeon's name again fv:koddowkkoddowk.  \
\\pdn kun-kuyuk\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bardabardabme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge flap\
\\re flap (v.i.)\
\\de flapping action of dogs when they flap their head and bodies to shake off dirt or water\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bardakikkik\
\\ps n.\
\\ge resin\
\\re resin produced by bees\
\\de resin found on rock, produced by native bees and used as a fixative for wood work (e.g. to attach a point to the end of a spear)\
\\xv Bardakikkik yiman kabbay, mayh ka-marnbun. Karri-kinje ka-kerlkdanj.\
\\xe fi:Bardakikkik resin is similar to iron-wood resin (and) it is made by insects. When we heat it, it becomes soft.\
\\xv Kun-waral kun-burddji ngun-mang bardakikkik yi-ngukdudme wardi.\
\\xe If your shadow falls on the resin, it can capture your body smell and your internal organs can swell up.\
\\xv Bardakikkik man-kung ka-marnbun man-karrarndalk barawalkno.\
\\xe Rock resin is related to wild honey hives which the bees make from the resin on Triodia spinifex.\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur Djnj= kalabardaman\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardangarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spear.type\
\\re spear type\
\\de a composite spear with hardwood head with numerous short straight or slightly recurved barbs or serrations uniserially aligned along\
the margin of the hardwood head\
\\uv I\
\\uv E, Djnj =bokko\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardbakme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge collapse\
\\re collapsing of grass\
\\de collapsing of grass (especially sorghum spp.) at the start of the dry season as it dries out\
\\xv Ka-bardbakme man-bedje wanjh karri-wurlhke.\
\\xe The spear grass falls down and then we burn it.\
\\pdv kk = kuyukmurridjme\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardbard\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grevillea.spp.\
\\re fi:Grevillea_heliosperma\
\\re fi:Grevillea_decurrens\
\\de Two kinds of Grevillea tree.\
\\xv Man-bardbard la man-dadjek kabene-djarrknguybun.\
\\xe The fi:Grevillea_heliosperma and the fi:Grevillea_pteridifolia flower together (at the same time).\
\\sc Grevillea heliosperma, Grevillea decurrens\
\\uv Djnj, W, I\
\\ur Kdj lowland variety= an-djenkererr\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardbardang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spear\
\\re spear type\
\\de stone-headed spear with a pointed quartzite macroflake (Leilira blade) head and bamboo shaft, said to be used by fv:mimih spirits.\
\\xv Bardbardang man-kole mimih nuye, yiman yorndidj.\
\\xe Bardbardang is the name of a kind of spear that fi:mimih spirits use, similar to the stone blade called fi:yorndidj.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardbokyo\
\\mr bard+bok+yo 'knee+track-lie'\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge leave.knee.track\
\\re knee track\
\\de Knee tracks (indicating that a couple have had sex).\
\\xv Duruk Kabardbokyo darnki Anbangbang.\
\\xe The place Duruk Kabardbokyo ['dog's knee track'] is close to Anbangbang billabong [in the Nawurlandja district of Kakadu National\
Park].\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barddedde\
\\pr man-\
\\pr \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Flagellaria.indica\
\\re fi:Flagellaria_indica\
\\de kind of jungle vine\
\\sc Flagellaria indica\
\\ee Used to tie barks together in fv:bilem 'canoe' construction. Also used as the frame for the mouth of mandjabu fv:fish traps. The\
mythological creation of this plant is described in a story associated with fv:ngayod 'the rainbow serpent' at the site called Dilebang on\
the Arnhem Land escarpment.\
\\uv I= man-barddedde, Djdj= barddedde, Kdj= midjakkorr\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardderre\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Terminalia.grandiflora\
\\re fi:Terminalia_grandiflora\
\\de Nutwood, a tree (7-15m) with pendulous branchlets and green-yellow inflorescences which appear in the dry season\
\\sc Terminalia grandiflora\
\\xv An-bardderre an-worrkuyengkuyeng.\
\\xe The fi:Terminalia_grandiflora tree has very long leaves.\
\\xv Yikabeh burluddak arri-kornmang arri-djedme arri-lowkmang. Bardderre, an-bardderre kunukka ka-rri.\
\\xe Sometimes we make spear-thrower handles from stringybark or we carve them from strips of wood taken from fi:Terminalia_grandiflora trees.\
\\xv Bararrkno arri-marnbuni dadken, an-bardderre an-yahwurd arri-bakkeyi arri-marnbuni.\
\\xe We used to make axe handles from fi:Terminalia_grandiflora, breaking off a small piece and working it.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Maytenus.ferdinandi \
\\re fi:Maytenus_ferdinandi \
\\sc Maytenus ferdinandi \
\\uv I\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barddurrungkuldi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge kneel\
\\re kneel (v.i.)\
\\de kneel down\
\\xv Yi-barddurrungkuldin!\
\\xe Kneel down!\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barddjabdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge rest.knee\
\\re knee resting on other leg (lying on back)\
\\de lie on one's back with one leg bent at the knee and the other resting across\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barddjordme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge grow\
\\re grow (of grass, bamboo)\
\\de grow (of grass or bamboo)\
\\xv Kunumeleng man-bedje ka-barddjordme.\
\\xe The spear grass grows in the early wet season.\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barddjubarr\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Vigna_vexillata\
\\de Twining vine with perennial roots and annual slender hairy aerial stem. Leaves: trifoliate, slightly hairy both sides, centre leaflet largest, blades 70-120 mm long x 20-25 mm wide, elongated pointed tip, petiole 30-60 mm long. Flowers: pink or purple-mauve pea-flowers, 20-25 mm long, solitary or a few on long stalks. The tuber can be eaten raw. Emus eat the flowers.\
\\sc Vigna vexillata\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-kornak, I= bulkud\
\\dt 04/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx Bardikkalahyi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place\
\\re placename\
\\de place in Waybburda estate\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardkarlangno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kneecap\
\\re kneecap\
\\de kneecap\
\\xv Ka-bokan konda ka-menemboyo ngardjinno ku-kom ya konda ku-bardkarlang ka-bokarrme konda ku-bardkarlang\
ka-bokarrme an-berrk ka-re wanjh ku-rrenge ka-marneboyo ku-rrenge ka-marneboyo. Kukku ka-bokan \
\\xe She [emu] carries water here [indicates bottom of neck] it lies in the reservoir in her neck and also in her knee joints there is water so\
that when she is walking around away from water, there is a reserve of water in her feet. She carries water.\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardmarneyi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge honey\
\\re honey type (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de Type of honey found in the ground.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde nabiwo\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardkukudji\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.same.patriclan\
\\re be in the same patriclan\
\\de be members of the same patriclan\
\\xv Kabene-bardkukudji bene-Djordi.\
\\xe They are both in the same patriclan, the Djordi clan.\
\\dt 19/Jan/2012\
\
\\lx bardmo\
\\pr man\
\\pr an-\
\\va bardmono\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable noun\
\\ge stem\
\\re stem of plant\
\\de stem of a plant\
\\xv Wayuk kandi-marnema nga-bardmongun.\
\\xe Give me some waterlily stems, I'll eat them.\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj, I, W, E\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardngalng\
\\pr kun-\
\\va bardngalngno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable noun\
\\ge kneecap\
\\re kneecap\
\\de kneecap\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 15/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardngorrkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge carry.on.shoulder\
\\re carry macropod on shoulder\
\\de carry large game (e.g. macropods) on the shoulders, the forearms/head held over one shoulder and the legs over the other \
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardngorrmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge carry.on.shoulder\
\\re lift macropod up onto shoulders\
\\de lift up large game (macropod, emu) onto the shoulders in order to carry it\
\\pdn nguyukmarrmimodme\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardrayek\
\\pr man-\
\\mr bard+rayek 'knee[stem]+strong'\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Haemodorum.coccineum\
\\re fi:Haemodorum_coccineum\
\\de tall long stemmed strap-leaved plant with red flowers\
\\sc Haemodorum coccineum\
\\ee The flowers and roots of this plant are used to extract a brown dye used to colour plant fibres used in the manufacturing of string bags\
and pandanus baskets.\
\\sy windilk, kala\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardrohrokme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge stand.straight\
\\re stand as plants do\
\\de attempt to stand straight as do plants with straight stems\
\\xv Yimarnek man-bedje la wayarra ka-bardrohrokme.\
\\xe It looked like spear grass but it really was a spirit standing up like spear grass.\
\\xv 'Konda nga-yerrkan man-bedje nga-bardrohrokme'.\
\\xe I'll stand here and try to imitate the spear grass [words of a fv:wayarra spirit as sung in a song of the fv:kun-borrk_wurrurrumi song\
genre].\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardubardume\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge flapping\
\\re flapping noise\
\\de flapping of fish when taken out of water and put on the ground\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bardwokdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge sound.of.bamboo\
\\re sound made by bamboo being struck\
\\de sound made by bamboo being struck, usually in the context of gravel being thrown at bamboo groves as part of a harvest ritual\
\\xv Dja arri-dadjkeyiwarre an-kole arri-bunjdjahwohdjahwoni arri-nani an-marneyurrhkuldi. Arri-rey 'lardarlarr'\
arri-dongi an-kole ba-bardwokdi kun-warddeyi 'koddowkkoddowk' arri-yimi. Wanjh arri-dongi. Kun-djelk arri-mangi\
'lerrelerrr' ba-rrongi bardno arri-dongi an-kole, wanjh arri-wokdi 'koddowkkoddowk' arri-yimi.\
\\xe And we cut bamboo spears, visiting the bamboo groves. We found the bamboo standing there up straight for us. When approaching\
the grove we would hit the bamboo stems with stones and the nodes would make a noise. We would call out fi:koddowkkoddowk [the\
name of a pidgeon that lives in the bamboo groves]. Then we would strike the bamboo. We would get gravel and throw it at the\
bamboo nodes and it would make a noise fi:lerrelerr and we would call out that word again fi:koddowkkoddowk.  \
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bardyi\
\\va ngal-bardyi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge armband\
\\re armband\
\\de armband made from various plant fibres (e.g bark of fi:Brachychiton_paradoxum) worn on the biceps for personal adornment, or given by lovers to each other as mementos.\
\\ee Decorated ceremonial armbands may have two feathered tassles (one on each side) with the colour of feathers sometimes denoting\
moiety affiliation. Such decorated armbands are used in diplomacy ceremonies such as fv:marradjiri or fv:mamurrng and fv:djabbi 'circumcision ceremonies'.\
\\xv Yoh dukkarrinj Mardayin yah yiman namekke njamedno berlno yiman, yo nameninj kondanjbo ngad konda Malnjangarnak o konda Bod Karri o konda o Elcho, Yurrwi o Raminkirning o konda, konda ngad Maningrida.  Namekke birri-karrmeninj and namekke djabbi bindi-woyi fi:usim birri-yimeninj ngal-bardyi.\
\\xe Yes, they put them [on their arms] in the Mardayin ceremony and whatsit, they use them on their arms, people from here\
Malnjangarnak or here at Bod Karri or Elcho Island, Milingimbi or Ramin.girning or here at Maningrida. They used those and exchanged them during circumcision ceremonies, those armbands.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\so Bob Burrawal\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlabarla\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mangrove.sp.\
\\re mangrove sp.\
\\de river mangrove\
\\sc Aegiceras corniculatum\
\\xv Barlabarla ka-djordme Manbulu Karri, ka-barrhburren.\
\\xe The river mangrove grows at Manbulukarri, and covers over everything.\
\\sd plant\
\\uv I\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlahdjabname\
\\mr barlah+djab+name 'slide track+elongate+put'\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge place.straight.track\
\\re place a sliding track\
\\de the creation of a long and straight track or slide created by a sliding animal such as reptiles\
\\dt 19/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlahkan\
\\mr barlah+kan 'slide track+take'\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge follow.slide.track\
\\re follow sliding track\
\\de follow the sliding tracks (typically of a reptile)\
\\xv Karri-barlahkan wardi kinga ka-yo.\
\\xe Let's follow this slide track, there could be a crocodile there.\
\\dt 19/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge make.track\
\\re make sliding track\
\\de make a slithering track (of reptiles)\
\\dt 18/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlahnan\
\\mr barlah+nan 'track+see'\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge see reptile slide tracks\
\\re see reptile slide tracks\
\\de look at reptile tracks\
\\xv Yi-barlahna wardi ngal-badjan ka-worhnan.\
\\xe Have a look for tracks [of a crocodile] in case the mother [crocodile] is on the lookout.\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barlahno\
\\mr barlah+no 'slide track+3possessor'\
\\ng The nominal fv:barlah is incorporable\
\\ps n.\
\\ge slide.track\
\\re slide track of a reptile e.g. crocodile\
\\de slide track of crawling animals, mostly reptiles, especially crocodiles and goannas\
\\cf barlahnan\
\\ce see slide tracks\
\\cf barlahyo\
\\ce there are reptilian slide tracks\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barlahyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr barlah+yo 'slide track+lie'\
\\ge slide.track.be\
\\re slide tracks are there\
\\re tracks, reptilian slide tracks are there\
\\de reptilian slide tracks are present\
\\xv Kuyinkoluy ku-kahbo kuyin-worhnang ka-bolhyo barlahyoy larrhmeng 'Oh' yimeng, 'konda nuk nga-nang modjarrkki \
ka-bolhyo. Ngarduk kokok kaluk nga-mang. Ngarduk kokok ngayi nga-rrurndeng nga-mang kaluk.'  Bini-danginj,\
|fi\{but him big brother now,\} ka-rrurndeng kabi-mang, 'ngarduk kokok ngayi nga-mang kaluk ba ka-bun ka-djudbakke\
kure ku-ronj yo', nungkah yimeng djahwodjahwong. \
\\xe The young man came to a creek and went down almost to the water and saw there were slide tracks of a crocodile which had dried in\
the sun.  'Oh' he said, 'I must be looking at freshwater crocodile tracks. I'll go and get my older brother. They were two brothers and he\
was talking about his elder brother, 'I'll go back and get my big brother so he'll break its neack and kill it there in the water' he said and\
went off to tell him. \
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlanjdjarr\
\\pr man-\
\\va man-balanjdjarr\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge woollybutt.tree\
\\re Darwin woollybutt tree\
\\re woollybutt tree\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_miniata\
\\de Darwin woollybutt tree\
\\xv Mimno ka-djalmang yiman mani man-barlanjdjarr manekke ka-ngun. \
\\xe [The emu] eats the seeds which it just gets from a tree like this one here, this fi:Eucalyptus_miniata tree.\
\\sc Eucalyptus miniata\
\\ee In Kundedjnjenghmi at least, this name refers to a variety whose fibrous bark is considered long (from the ground upwards to where\
the fibrous bark terminates). The short-barked variety is called fv:an-nerrekmi. Long fibrous bark strips from this tree are good for\
lighting fires. The bark of fv:(m)an-nerrekmi however is not as useful. The onset of flowering is taken as a sign for the start of\
fv:wurrkeng season and also that dry weather has properly arrived. The seeds may be eaten raw. Emus also eat the seeds.\
\\pdn kk = djerrngkolh\
\\uv Djnj, E, I\
\\sy an-djalen\
\\ur Kdj = an-djalen\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlarra\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re Owenia vernicosa\
\\re Owenia reticulata\
\\de kind of small to medium sized tree (4-12m)\
\\xv Lambalk ka-ngun kurrkno an-barlarra, ngurrurdu mak ka-ngun man-me.\
\\xe The lambalk glider possum eats the sap of the fi:Owenia_vernicosa tree and emus eat the fruit.\
\\sc Owenia vernicosa, Owenia reticulata\
\\uv Djnj (an-barlarra), W (man-barlarra)\
\\ur Kdj= an-barnadja, E= man-ngarnarrngh, I= man-ngarnarrh, W synonym= ngukdjirrworlk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlarrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spotted.catfish\
\\re spotted eel-tailed catfish\
\\de spotted eel-tailed catfish sp.\
\\xv Barlarrk, yiman marrngunj ka-kukyime.\
\\xe A spotted eel-tailed catfish is similar to the ordinary Neosilurus spp. [except it has spots]\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Barlbbarnarra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re placename\
\\de large wetland region near the lower Cadell River where the Gun-nartpa language is spoken.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlbbirr\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Gardenia.megasperma\
\\re fi:Gardenia_megasperma\
\\de Kind of Gardenia tree with fruit that has an edible pulp around a very large seed.\
\\sc Gardenia megasperma\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sy an-djarrbirlwarra\
\\ur E= man-birlhbirlh, man-moyi badjanno, man-barlbbirl; I, W= man-barlbinj, man-moyi man-badjan\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlbinj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Gardenia.megasperma\
\\re fi:Gardenia_megasperma\
\\de kind of Gardenia tree with a fruit that has a thin edible layer covering a very large seed\
\\xv Man-barlbinj barnemno ka-rri.\
\\xe fi:Gardenia_megasperma has a fruit.\
\\sc Gardenia megasperma\
\\sy man-moyi man-badjan\
\\uv I\
\\uv Djnj= an-barlbbirr\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barle\
\\pr man-\
\\va barleno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge vagina\
\\re vagina\
\\de vagina\
\\sn 2\
\\de entrance hole to fi:Tetragonula_hockingsi bee hive\
\\xv Minj ka-badjname diyawarra. Badjyak nakka. Nakka barleno kadjalmarnbun. Njamed, badjno minj ka-wernhmarnbun,\
dja njamed ka-djalohkuykme wanjh ka-ngimen.\
\\xe fi:Tetragonula_hockingsi bees don't make an entrance tube to their hives. There is no long pipe-like entrance. They make a 'vagina'. They\
don't create a proper tube entrance but just spray some resin around the entrance and go inside.\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barledjenmurrngno\
\\va man-barledjenmurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\ge vulva\
\\re vulva\
\\de vulva\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barledjenngun\
\\mr barle+djen+ngun 'vagina+tongue+eat'\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge vagina.tongue.eat\
\\re have vaginal sex\
\\re vaginal intercourse\
\\de have vaginal intercourse\
\\xv Nga-barledjennguneng!\
\\xe I had sex with her!\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlekurlahno\
\\va man-barlekurlah\
\\mr barle+kurlah+no 'vagina+skin+3possessed'\
\\ps n.\
\\ge vagina.skin\
\\re hymen\
\\de hymen\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Barlerr\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename near Bolkdjam outstation south of Maningrida\
\\de Place near Bolkdjam outstation south of Maningrida\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx barlhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge sweat\
\\de formative in fv:kurrnginjbarlhme 'sweat (v.i.)'\
\\xv Nga-kurrnginjbarlhme.\
\\xe I'm sweating.\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barli\
\\ps n.\
\\ge raptor.spp.\
\\re fi:Elanus_notatus\
\\re fi:Accipiter_novaehollandiae\
\\re black-shouldered kite and grey goshawk\
\\re grey goshawk and black-shouldered kite\
\\de two kinds of raptors with black and white markings; black-shouldered kite and the grey goshawk\
\\sc Elanus notatus, Accipiter novaehollandiae\
\\uv I\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barli\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge crooked\
\\re crooked\
\\re twisted\
\\re skewed\
\\de crooked, twisted, skewed\
\\xv Kukbarli.\
\\xe Crooked body/crippled/object out of shape.\
\\xv Mimbarli.\
\\xe Cross-eyed/having an off-centred iris.\
\\xv Kanembarli nakka.\
\\xe It has crooked ears [a dog with one ear that goes up and the other sticking out sideways].\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlidan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge become.crooked\
\\re twist out of shape\
\\re become crooked, lopsided\
\\de become crooked or twisted.\
\\xv Yi-biwkeng, bonj barlidanj.\
\\xe You've bent it, it's crooked now.\
\\pdv barlibonghme\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlkarrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge graze\
\\re graze a target with spear or firearm\
\\de graze a target when spearing or shooting with a firearm\
\\xv Yimarnek bi-yameninj la dedjbarlkarrhkeng mudyarlarrmeng wanjh ngukdirrhmeng kukwurrhkerrinj!\
\\xe He was trying to spear it [an agile wallaby] but grazed its backside, the fur got ripped off and it got such a fright that it shit itself!\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge fill\
\\re fill (v.t.)\
\\de fill up a container to capacity\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlkkan\
\\ps n.\
\\ge boomerang\
\\re boomerang\
\\de sacred boomerangs used in pairs as musical instruments in various ceremonial contexts\
\\xv Malalam yiman ka-yime yi-bengkan man-djoh yiman ka-yime manu, kabirri-marnbun njamed, barlkkan.\
\\xe In dry hill country where you can find fi:Acacia_difficilis, they use that timber to make boomerangs.\
\\sy karlikarli\
\\ee These boomerangs were traditionally traded from the south.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlkkidj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge agile.wallaby\
\\re agile wallaby (clan lect)\
\\re fi:Macropus_agilis\
\\de clan lect name for what is usually called fv:warradjangkal 'male fi:Macropus_agilis'\
\\uv kun-dedjwarre (na-Kurulk clan lect)\
\\ee Rembarrnga fv:barlkkidj 'small fi:Macropus_agilis'\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlmardi\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de large tree (mangrove?) which develops cavities in the trunk\
\\xv Mi-barlmardi ngarr-ngimeninj ngarr-niwirrinj.\
\\xe We should go and sit inside the fv:man-barlmardi tree [a song of fv:wayarra spirits in the fv:wurrurrumi_kun-borrk song genre].\
\\sc mangrove sp. ?\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlmarradja\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wind.name\
\\re wind name in wet season\
\\de name of a wet season wind which blows during long extended periods of rain\
\\xv Kudjewk, djal ka-djaldjakdung munguyh en ngalengman. Ka-borledke makkumbu barlmarradja, niyaniya.\
\\xe In the wet season, when it keeps raining continuously well that\'92s it then [i.e. fv:makkumbu ]. It changes from fv:makkumbu and fv:barlmarradja to fv:niyaniya.\
\
\\lx barlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.filled\
\\re filled up (v.i.)\
\\de be filled to capacity\
\\xv Karri-borrahkendong rowk wanjh barlmeng karri-yirrurndeng.\
\\xe Let's fill up all the containers with water and then take them back full.\
\\pdv barlbonghme\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlmurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wasp\
\\re wasp\
\\de paper wasp\
\\xv Nabodmebarnko nakka ngalengarre barlmurrng djang, borom nawu dadbe na-bang, kan-baye... barlmurrng, dadbe nawu karrih-yime.\
\\xe At Nabodmebarnko there is a wasp dreaming place. That wasp is analogous to a king brown snake, that wasp, also called fi:borom, it bites us and is dangerous. That's what we say.\
\\sy borom\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I = djakbarlh, E= burrmule\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barlokbarlok\
\\ps adj.\
\\re fast\
\\de Quickly, fast.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx barlungme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge divert\
\\re divert (v.i.)\
\\re change course or direction\
\\de change course, turn and travel in another direction, turn off a track\
\\xv Manin karri-barlungmen!\
\\xe We turn off here!\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnambi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fishing.net\
\\re fishing net\
\\de fishing net, kind of drag net\
\\bw from Makassarese fi:panambe 'sort of fishing net'\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnangarra\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge day\
\\re daytime\
\\de day time\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnayalak\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re Calytrix megaphylla (plant)\
\\de kind of Calytrix bush but there is difference in opinion amongst speakers as to which species of Calytrix bush bears this name. Some\
speakers have labelled fi:Calytrix_megaphylla as fv:(m)an-barnayalak and others use the name also for fi:Calytrix_exstipulata and\
fi:Calytrix_arborescens. As fi:Calytrix_exstipulata is also widely known as fv:man-barndarr, and that fi:Calytrix_megaphylla and\
fi:Calytrix_exstipulata are very similar, it is likely that fv:(m)an-barnayalak is the name for fi:Calytrix_megaphylla.\
\\sc Calytrix megaphylla, fs:some_speakers_also Calytrix exstipulata, Calytrix arborescens\
\\sy an-barndarr\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, I, E\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnba\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge goose.stick\
\\re goose stick\
\\de Throwing stick used to kill geese. Men would climb up into the top of trees and wait for geese to fly over. THey would throw their sticks at the geese to kill them.\
\\xv Ngarri-buni bamurru mako dorrengh. Yika bu nawu yawarreni mako wanjh man-barnba buni o birri-raworreni.\
\\xe We would shoot the magpie geese with shotguns. Sometimes if we couldn't find a shotgun we would use throwing sticks or sometimes we would use both.\
\\dt 05/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx barndad\
\\pr kun-\
\\va barndadno\
\\ge femur\
\\re femur\
\\de Thigh, femur, upper leg.\
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx barndadken\
\\ps n.\
\\re hafted stone axe\
\\de Stone axe with wooden haft.\
\\syn dadken\
\\ee The literal meaning is \'91leg-of\'92 or \'91thigh-of\'92 which is derived from the practice of inserting the haft of the axe into a belt around the waist so that the axe was always hanging against the thigh.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 21/Feb/2015\
\
\\lx barndadborledmingun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge approach.indirectly\
\\re approach OBJ indirectly\
\\de follow and approach a target by curving around to one side\
\\xv Kure ngarr-barndadborledmingun ba kamak marrek ngan-nan ngarrwoneng.\
\\xe Let's go around to the side [divert off a direct course] so it [a buffalo] won't see us.\
\\dt 20/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barndaddukkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge tie.legs\
\\re tie macropod legs to arms for cooking\
\\de tie the legs of a macropod to the arms in preparation for cooking in a ground oven\
\\ee The fur of the macropod is singed in a fire and then scraped clean. The lower legs are cut off at the knee and then the legs are tied up to\
the arms. The animal is then disembowelled and edible offal is cooked separately. The carcass is then placed in a ground oven and\
cooked.\
\\p DSCF0019.JPG in Brett's roo hunting pics\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barndadkadjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge follow.crouching\
\\re follow after OBJ\
\\de follow after an OBJ along a particular path or route\
\\xv Ngalekke ngurrurdu, yi-warddebarndadkadju kuni.\
\\xe There's the emu, you follow after it along that line of rocks.\
\\dt 20/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barndadken\
\\ps n. \
\\ge stone.axe\
\\re stone axe\
\\re axe (edge ground stone)\
\\de Stone axe; literally 'from femur' because axes were carried in a belt and hung at the side against the leg.\
\
\\lx barndarr\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Calytrix.\
\\re fi:Calytrix_exstipulata (plant)\
\\re turkey bush\
\\de turkey bush\
\\sc Calytrix exstipulata, Calytrix arborescens\
\\sy (m)an-barnayalak\
\\ee Although fv:(m)an-barnayalak is the name for fi:Calytrix_megaphylla, some speakers also use this name as a synonym for fv:(m)an-barndarr\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, I, E\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barndi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.high\
\\re high up (v.i.)\
\\de be situated in a high place\
\\xv Ngurri-barndin!\
\\xe Stay up there!\
\\xv Wo, mimih ka-madjbarndi nakka ka-madjkenwe wanjki.\
\\xe Yes, the fi:mimih spirits have their swags up there, their bedding is laid out like that.\
\\xv Nga-dedjbarndi manih.\
\\xe I'll sit up on this [chair].\
\\ng Nominal subjects can be incorporated.\
\\pdv kalawhmiken\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barndidj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge louse\
\\re louse\
\\de head louse\
\\xv Kan-barndidjkurrurdmen!\
\\pde Kan-dordna!\
\\xe Check me out for head lice.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dord\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barndol\
\\ps n.\
\\ge python\
\\re carpet python\
\\de carpet python\
\\sc Morelia spilota variegata\
\\xv Barndol kukdahdadjmiken.\
\\xe The carpet python has striped blocks of colour.\
\\uv I, W\
\\ur Kdj= djokbinj\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barndorrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\va barndorrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable\
\\ge glands\
\\re glands in groin and under arms, lymph nodes\
\\de lymph nodes, glands in groin and under arms\
\\xv Yiddok yi-barndorrkbabang?\
\\xe Are your glands tender?\
\\xv Nga-barndorrklurlme.\
\\xe My lymph nodes are swollen.\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barndja\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge arm\
\\re arm (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de arm\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-berl\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barndjarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mussel\
\\re mussel (freshwater bivalve)\
\\de an edible freshwater bivalve mussel\
\\uv Kundedjwarre clan lect\
\\uv I= kurruk, W= karnubirr\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnemno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporbale as fv:barnem-\
\\ge fruit\
\\re fruit of a plant\
\\de fruit of a plant\
\\xv Barnemno ka-rri.\
\\xe It has fruit.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Barni\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de a place with a fresh water spring surrounded by pandanus, in Kakodbebuldi estate\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnibarnimen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge droop\
\\re droop\
\\de droop, become wrinkled and saggy\
\\xv Mimbarnibarniminj.\
\\xe His eyes became saggy and wrinkled.\
\\sy weleberrkmen\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnkabarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge crab\
\\re crab\
\\de mud crab of salt water habitat\
\\pdv ngalkurndamenkorrongko\
\\sc Scylla serrata\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnkirrk\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge billy.goat.fruit\
\\re fi:Terminalia_carpentariae fruit\
\\de fruit of the fi:Terminalia_carpentariae tree\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnko\
\\pr man\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Grevillea.sp.\
\\re fi:Grevillea_pteridifolia\
\\de fern-leaved grevillea\
\\sc Grevillea pteridifolia\
\\sy (m)an-dadjek\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnkoy\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grandchild\
\\re grandchild [MM, MMB to grandchildren]\
\\de term of address used by MM, MMB to grandchildren\
\\uv Kundedjwarre clan lect\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barnname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge place.up.high\
\\re place up high\
\\de place in a high position, hang up\
\\xv Yi-barnamen warde duruk ka-ngun.\
\\xe Put it up high otherwise the dogs might eat it.\
\\pdv kalawhke\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Barabba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a fi:duwa moiety Kune and Dangbon speaking patriclan from central Arnhem Land.\
\\xv Konda bedman na-Barabba, Kurrkdjurle, kunred nuye Wamud na-Barabba, na-wernwarre ngarduk Kurrkdjurle.\
Kun-red nuye Mimburrng.\
\\xe This [land] here belongs to the Barabba clan, this place Kurrkdjurle was for Wamud of the Barabba clan who was my eldest brother, Kurrkdjurle [was his place]. His country was Mimburrng [an estate name].\
\\ee A fv:yikurrumu name equivalent for Barabba clan is fv:wanjngurra\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barabun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge fail\
\\re fail to achieve\
\\de fail in an effort to achieve something ,try until tired, give up after an unsuccessful attempt\
\\xv Birri-yerrkarrinj rowk wanjh dokmeng djadberlhberlh, korrkkeng, kayakki, korrkkeng,\
kayakki, barabom.\
\\xe They all sat themselves down and red-shouldered parrot got up and tried to lance it [the boil on black-faced cuckoo shrike's leg], but\
after a number of attempts he gave up.\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Barangh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de A fi:duwa moiety Jawoyn speaking patriclan on the southern Arnhem Land plateau in the upper Mann River region.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bararrkno\
\\va kun-bararrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable as fv:bararrk\
\\ge axe.handle\
\\re axe handle type\
\\de type of axe handle for stone axes\
\\xv Bararrkno arri-marnbuni dadken, an-bardderre an-yahwurd arri-bakkeyi arri-marnbuni.\
\\xe We used to make axe handles from fi:Terminalia_grandiflora, breaking off a small piece and working it.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barawalkno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge resin\
\\re plant resin\
\\re spinifix resin\
\\re fi:Triodia_resin\
\\de Resin found on the parts of certain plants, e.g. cypress pine trees, but especially the resin on the leaves of fi:Triodia spinifex plants which is highly flammable and used by bees to construct their hives.\
\\xv Njamed nakka barawalkno ka-marnbun, badjno ka-marnbun, ka-belbbelbme.\
\\xe It [the honey bee] makes the resin, it makes the entrance tube from that resin, sticking it into place.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx baridjbarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge paperbark.sp.\
\\re paperbark.sp.\
\\de kind of large paperbark tree\
\\ee fi:Melaleuca_leucadendra which grows on plain country is called fv:baridjbarr. fi:M._leucadendra which grow in springs and by the edge of watercourses are called fv:(m)an-murlmu.\
\\xv Baridjbarr ka-rri Kamarrkawarn, an-kimuk.\
\\xe There are fi:Melaleuca_leucadendra paperbarks at Kamarrkawarn, they are very big trees.\
\\xv Baridjbarr karri-kodbun karri-marnbun wubbunj.\
\\xe We use the fv:baridjbarr paperbark to make canoes.\
\\sc Melaleuca leucadendra\
\\sy birriyalang\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 2\
\\ge raft\
\\re paperbark raft\
\\re raft\
\\de paperbark raft made from fi:Melaleuca_leucadendra\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= kuluyambi\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barme\
\\va bame\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge shine\
\\re shine with bright colour or brightness, glisten\
\\de shine, glisten, be bright or brilliant in colour (either in terms of lightness or in hue), be vivid\
\\xv Djadberlhberl nawu ka-karlangbarme.\
\\xe That red-shouldered parrot, the one with the brightly coloured shoulder.\
\\xv Ngudda yi-ngurlme yi-re, ngayi nga-barme nga-re, ngayi yiman man-kalarr.\
\\xe You move as a dark form, I go with a bright shining body, I am like the ghost gum (a Kuninjku fi:kun-borrk genre song text).\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge smear\
\\re smear with viscous substance\
\\xv Murrkanjno arri-mangi arri-yirrmi barri-bayiyih an-kung arri-barung.\
\\xe We strip off the inner bark [off Acacia difficilis] and bite the bark after having smeared it with the honey.\
\\pdv banjinhme\
\\se barurren\
\\ps refl.v.\
\\ge paint.self\
\\re paint self with ochre\
\\de smear self with ochre or other substance\
\\xv Karri-barurren delek wanjh karri-melme.\
\\xe Let's paint ourselves with pipe clay and dance.\
\\pdv banjinhmerren\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wind\
\\re wet season wind, north-west monsoons\
\\de wet season wind, north-west monsoons\
\\bw from Makassarese fi:ba:ra? 'west wind, rainwind'\
\\sd weather\
\\dt 29/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Barradj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan on the Arnhem Land plateau.\
\\xv Duwa, bedberre Worrkorl Warddjak. Kaddum wam wanjh bebmeng bu Barradj, ku-buldjdjarn. Ka-djale kaddum Kayerrngwe kaddum ba-djalwam duwa.\
\\xe That's the fi:duwa moiety area for the Worrkorl and Warddjak clans. It goes upstream and becomes Barradj in the middle [of the East Alligator river].  It goes all the way to Kayerrngwe and belongs to fi:duwa moiety upstream [from there].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 29/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Barrakbarrak\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de place in Birba estate, upper Casell River region\
\\uv D, E\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 29/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barrakbarrak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cormorant\
\\re little pied cormorant\
\\re cormorant\
\\re fi:Phalacrocax_melanoleucas (cormorant)\
\\de little pied cormorant\
\\cf Dengebarrakbarrak.\
\\ce A person who has feet with toes turned outwards, (so called because the footprints of such a person look like the tracks left by the little pied cormorant).\
\\sc Phalacrocax melanoleucas\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\ur W= mandamed\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrarn\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\pr kun-\
\\va barrarnno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable as fv:-barrarn- e.g. nga-barrarnnang 'I saw a gorge'; can take a third person singular verbal prefix and function as a\
nominal predicate fv:ka-barrarn 'there is a gorge'\
\\sn 1\
\\ge ridge\
\\re ridge\
\\de steep or vertical cliff face, steep ridge line\
\\sn 2\
\\ge gorge\
\\re gorge\
\\de gorge or narrow rift in escarpment country\
\\xv Ku-barrarndjokko.\
\\xe In a narrow gorge.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge rut\
\\re rut, washed out rut on the road  \
\\sn 4\
\\ge fishtrap.mouth\
\\re fish trap mouth\
\\de the entrance piece or mouth of a fv:man-djabu 'woven conical fish trap'\
\\se -barrahbarrarn\
\\pr man-, an-, ku-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge REDUP.gorge\
\\re maze of gorges\
\\sy man-barrarnwern, ku-barrarnwern\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 29/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barrarnmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge enter.gorge\
\\re enter a gorge\
\\de enter a gorge, pass through a gorge\
\\xv Konhda kure ngaye wanjh ngarrnghmey Namarnde Djini ka-bolkngeyyo. Kume yerre yiman mani barrarnmey\
kah-barrarn wanjh mey kundamen ka-bodmemurrngyirriyo, kun-bodmemurrng wanjh bodmemurrngkurrmerrinj.\
\\xe It came into my country and made its way through the rock country to a place called Namarnde Didjini. There it passed through a\
gorge like this one here where in that gorge which it took, there lies in a line the backbone of the blanket lizard. The rock and valley is\
his backbone which he placed there.\
\\dt 29/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx barrawu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spear.type\
\\re shovel spear\
\\de long wooden-headed 'shovel-spear', with bamboo shaft and head having an exceptionally long (>320mm) broad, leaf-shaped blade of ironwood (fi:Erythrophleum_chlorostachys) although today the points are typically fashioned from hammered steel\
\\pdn djerrkudmiken\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrbarrbu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mythological.dog\
\\re dog in mythology, belonging to fv:mimih spirits\
\\de mythological dog, a pet belonging to the black rock kangaroo mimih spirit.\
\\xv Barrbarrbu mimih nuye duruk yiman Djabbarraboy.\
\\xe Barrbarrbu is a dog that belongs to the fv:mimih spirits, similar to fv:Djabbarraboy.\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Barrbinj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan in the lower Liverpool River region.\
\\xv Mani kun-wardde Marrirn ... Barrbinj kure kakbi, Marrirn koyek. Barrbinj..... Djok mani [south-east], Durlmangkarr\
walem.\
\\xe This rock is Marrirn [clan country] ... and Barrbinj is to the north, Marrirn clan is east of that.\
\\xv Yirridjdja rowk nanu wanjh Kumarrirnbang-beh ka-re bolk kunengkunu bolk-Barrbinj ka-djale kanjdji\
ka-bolk-buyika kure na-buyika Marrirn. \
\\xe It's all fi:yirridjdja moiety country from here at Kumarrirnbang to that Barrbinj country there and it goes right downstream to another\
[discontiguous] Marrirn estate.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrdjak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tinea\
\\re tinea\
\\de tinea, fungal itch or rash\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 19/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barradjungka\
\\ps n.\
\\ge waterlily.sp.\
\\re water lily (purple)\
\\re fi:Nymphaea_violacea\
\\de various purple waterlily species\
\\sc Nymphaea violacea\
\\xv Bu bene-bebmeng ku-red wanjh bene-worrhmeng bene-wilkdi nawu kalawan dja man-dem dja manu barrdjungka bene-kinjeng kore ku-yirrke dja nawu man-kung bene-delengbarnnameng kore balabbala.\
\\xe When they got back to camp they made a fire and cooked the goanna in the ashes and the purple and white water lily corms on the coals and put the honey they had gathered up in the roof of the shelter.\
\\pdn kk = narrenku\
\\uv W\
\\uv I= kanjwerr\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrel\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\va (m)an-barrelk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.platycarpa\
\\re fi:Acacia_platycarpa\
\\de kind of wattle tree or shrub, 3-7m high with cream to yellowish globular flowers\
\\xv An-barrel an-bang marrek arri-baye kan-dangbun.\
\\xe The fi:Acacia_platycarpa tree is poisonous, we don't bite it as it irritates the mouth.\
\\sc Acacia platycarpa\
\\sy an-bangkerlebangkerle\
\\ee There is frequent misidentification and confusion between fi:Acacia_platycarpa and fi:Acacia_mimula because of the similarity in the\
flowers, fruit and habitat. Brock (2001) describes the main differences in the size (especially width) of the leaves, time of flowering and\
the texture of the bark. fi:Acacia_platycarpa is described as having 'bark: rough and grey to brown on trunk, smooth and whitish on\
upper branches' and 'phyllodes: alternate, smooth to slightly coarse, stiff, broad, curved, upper margin strongly curved and often wavy,\
blade 11-16cm x 3-6cm, dull grey-green, 3-4 prominent raised longitudinal veins joining towards base, rounded tip.' (Brock 2001:71).\
fi:Acacia_mimula on the other hand is described as 'bark:rough, grey, fibrous to tessellated' and 'pyllodes: smooth, elongated, curved to\
sickle-shaped, widest at middle, blade 8-15 cm x 1-3cm, dull green with 2-3 prominent longitudinal veins. fi:Acacia_platycarpa flowers\
from November to July whilst fi:Acacia_mimula only from April to June (Brock 2001:68).\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= an-barrkkala\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx barrelk\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\nt variant of fv:man-barrel\
\\cf see (m)an-barrel\
\\dt 25/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrhbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge sunrise\
\\re sunrise (v.i.), (fi:kun-kurrng register)\
\\de sunrise, the appearance of the sun at dawn\
\\pde -barrhbun\
\\pdv kk\
\\dt 25/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrhbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\va -malabarrhbun\
\\ge sunrise\
\\re sunrise\
\\sn 1\
\\de sunrise, the appearance of the sun at dawn\
\\xv Ngurri-dolkka barrhbom!\
\\xe Get up you mob, the sun's up!\
\\xv La nakka kun-balem marrek yi-yime balemdukkurrukkurr. Yi-ngu:n fi:half yi-balembawon. Ka-malabarrhbun\
yi-ngun.\
\\xe Don't think that there is only a small [short] length of fat in it [the Oenpelli python]. You can eat some of the fat and set it aside. Early the next morning you can eat the rest.\
\\xv Mirurr arri-yoy wanjh malahmalayi Ngalurdbirrhmi arri-yoy. Kumekke-beh barrhbuni wanjh Berddolkko arri-wam\
arri-yoy arri-derrehmi Mibarra.\
\\xe We camped at Mirurr and then in the morning we went to Ngalurdbirrhmi and camped there. From there, at first light we would walk to Berddolkko, camp there, and then move further to Mibarra.\
\\sn 2\
\\de cover over, wrap up OBJ\
\\xv Kukilhken ku-kabo, ku-ngarre bad arri-yoy karrkad kumekke ku-warddeburrk, kun-kod arri-buni. An-mulmu dja\
arri-barrhbuni dja an-rurrkyahwurd kumekke ka-rurrkdi. Yika ku-wardderurrk barri-yoy yika kodbarre\
barri-marnbuni. Kure an-binik arri-yoy.\
\\xe Downstream on the creek, it is jungle, but we camped up on higher ground from the creek in the rock country and we would gather\
paperbark. We used fi:Melaleuca_leucadendra paperbark to make little shelters there. Sometimes they camped in the rock shelters and\
sometimes they made paperbark shelters. We [also] camped in the anbinik [fi:Allosyncarpia_ternata] forests.\
\\xv 'Kan-wo', bi-marneyimeng ngalu ngal-badjan 'kan-wo kun-kod ba nga-barrhburren.' Barrhburrinj wanjh yonginj\
ngaleng.\
\\xe 'Give me some', said the mother, 'give me paperbark so I can cover myself [to use as a blanket]. She covered herself over and she slept.\
\\pdn -barrhbonghme\
\\se barrhburren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\ge cover\
\\re cover self\
\\sn 1\
\\de cover self\
\\xv Wanjh ngalengman birri-marne-werrkwerrkmeng mehme barrhburrinj.\
\\xe Then they cleaned up the area and quail covered himself over.\
\\xv Kalawuddul ngurri-barrhburrimen ngurri-kengemen!\
\\xe You initiates cover yourselves over [with a blanket] and have fearful respect!\
\\sn 2\
\\de be a canopy of vegetation\
\\xv Barlabarla ka-djordme Manbulu Karri, ka-barrhburren.\
\\xe The river mangrove grows at Manbulu Karri and makes a thick canopy.\
\\pdn kk= kumbehmerren.\
\\dt 26/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge break.open\
\\re break open (v.t.)\
\\re burst open (v.t.)\
\\de crack or split open an OBJ, burst\
\\xv Mibbarr nungkah ka-bun nawu dabuno ka-ngun ka-rrowkke, ka-barrhke 'dek' ku-kebyih.\
\\xe The white bellied sea eagle breaks the [emu] egg to eat it, 'crack' it smashes it open with its beak.\
\\dt 26/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrhme\
\\va barrbarrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de shatter, crack or split, burst open\
\\xv Milhbarrhmeng namekke nurrika.\
\\xe That car has a smashed windscreen.\
\\pdn -barrhyamidokan\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrhyamidokan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge shatter\
\\re shatter(fi:kun-kurrng register)\
\\de crack or split, burst open\
\\xv Kun-bangam barrhyamidokang.\
\\xe The rock shattered.\
\\pde barrhme\
\\pdv kk\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barri\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.rat\
\\re brush-tailed rabbit rat\
\\re brush-tailed rabbit rat\
\\de Brush-tailed rabbit rat.\
\\sc Conilurus penicillatus\
\\sd mammals\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur W, I, E, Djnj= ? (resort to fv:djirrkkinj or fv:mulbbu)\
\\dt 05/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx barridi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge dance\
\\re dance form, used in sacred ceremony\
\\de particular style of womens' dancing performed at night in the public camp for the Kunabibi ceremony\
\\xv Daluk kabirri-barridi.\
\\xe The women are doing the [sacred] dancing.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Barrihdjowkkeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\mr barri-h-djowkke-ng '3pl.P-IMM-cross.over-PP'\
\\lit 'They crossed over', which refers to the journey of totemic female water spirits who travelled through this site.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de place name in the upper Tomkinson River district, fi:yirridjdja moiety, also site of an outstation and a nearby fi:yawkyawk 'mermaid'\
totemic centre\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge black.wallaroo\
\\re black wallaroo\
\\re wallaroo, black (male only)\
\\de male black rock wallaroo\
\\xv An-bongka barrk ka-ngun mimno bu ka-bamobarrbarrhme.\
\\xe The black wallaroo eats the seeds of fi:Acacia_latescens when the seed pods crack open.\
\\xv Nuye djabulhdjabulh barrk djukerre kamimburdme dja ka-ngun.\
\\xe That fi:Solanum_echinatum (wild tomato), is the food of the black wallaroo, which it eats with its eyes closed [because of the spikes].\
\\xv Nungan ka-karrme barrk morrdjdjanjno. Korroko bu barri-morrodjdjanjkadjung dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe The male black wallaroo has special fi:morrdjdjanjno hunting songs. A long time ago, the old people used to sing those songs.\
\\sc Macropus bernadus\
\\ee Most macropod species have a particular verb 'to hop' which can differ from species to species (and in some cases gender within the\
same species). Black wallaroos fv:kabirri-murlbardme 'they hop (of rock kangaroos)'.\
\\uv E, W, Djnj\
\\ur I= nadjinem\
\\sd mammal\
\\p DSCF0005.JPG [Brett's roo hunting pics]\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrkdord\
\\va barrkdordno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bird.sp.\
\\re bird (unidentified), looks out for black wallaroos\
\\re black wallaroo bird\
\\de unidentified bird which looks out for the black rock kangaroo (fi:Macropus_bernadus) and then comes and tells the hunter of its\
whereabouts\
\\cf mimdord\
\\ce expert hunter\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrkid\
\\pr na-, ngal-, man-, kun-, ku-, birri-, ngurri- etc\
\\sn 1\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge different\
\\re different (people, things), foreigners\
\\de Other or different;foreign.\
\\xv Na-barrkidko mak kabene-mamang ngulanyak kareh.\
\\xe Tomorrow, maybe those other two [people] will bring some things [for the funeral].\
\\xv Naneh bukka mey yarlbadjan nungan bukka marnbom, marnbom, koluy, koluy wurlebmeng yawam, kayakki. Dabbolk\
koluy. Koluy wurlebmeng yawam kayakki ku-barrkidbe.\
\\xe He got a large rope and organised it and then went down, down he went into the water and looked for it [the crocodile], but couldn't\
find it. It was the older brother. He went down and swam around looking for it and then searched in another place, but to no avail.\
\\xv Bene-dolkkang yawoyhno bene-djowkkeng kabono na-barrkid.\
\\xe The two got up again and crossed another (i.e. a different) creek.\
\\sn 2\
\\ps n.\
\\se kun-barrkid\
\\de languages considered not cognate with Bininj Kunwok or 'foreign' , such as the Alligator Rivers region languages of Urningangk, Mengerr, Gaagadju and Erre\
\\xv Yoh, yoh kunekke ngarri-yime 'barrkid'. O yika kabirri-yime 'na-karriken', karriken. Na-karriken nakka kureh,\
ka-rrungyibme. Yo baleh bu Balanda ka-yime? fi:Western! Karri, yiman kabirri-yime yiman karri-yime 'karrikad'\
fi:well nani bininj na-karriken.\
\\xe Yes, yes, that's right we say fi:barrkid people [to refer to the people of the Kakadu region]. Or sometimes we use the word\
fi:na-karriken or fi:karriken [literally 'westerners']. That word means the sunset people.How would you say that in English? Western!\
And we say fi:karri or fi:karrikad 'west'. Well that's what fi:na-karriken means, 'the westerners'.\
\\se birri-barrkid\
\\de people from distant language groups, who have no or few connections with Bininj Kunwok speaking people, especially to the west of\
Bininj Kunwok territory\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrkkala\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.platycarpa\
\\re Acacia platycarpa\
\\de kind of wattle tree or shrub, 3-7m high with cream to yellowish globular flowers\
\\sc Acacia platycarpa\
\\uv Kdj\
\\uv Djnj= an-barrel, an-barrelk, an-bangkerlebangkerle\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx barrkkileng\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge red.ash.tree\
\\re red ash tree\
\\de red ash tree\
\\sc Alphitonia excelsa\
\\sy an-der\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-barrkela, I= dird\
\\sd plant\
\\p ander_Alphitonia_excelsa.jpg\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx barrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.open\
\\re open (be)\
\\de be open\
\\ng most likely etymologically formative in fv:man-barrarn, barrarnno 'gorge' and fv:bambarr 'dead end gorge, gully' (fi:bam *head+ barr\
'open')\
\\cf dangbarrme\
\\ce having an open mouth\
\\xv Na-manjwarre ka-bidbun man-berrk ka-djalni ka-rrangbarrme.\
\\xe The crocodile will climb up out into the open and just sit there with its mouth open.\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Barrmo\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in the Kunburray estate along a rocky cliff face.\
\\xv Manu kadjalburnbun Barrmo-beh Kawelerreyme manu berre-walem ka-djalyirriyo, manu Kudjaborrng wanjh kumekke bi-bayeng ngal-yuhyungki doydoy ngal-durlmangkarr.\
\\xe The estate finishes over at Barrmo and Kewelerreyme and towards the south it keeps going along side [of other estates], but Kudjaborrng is the place where the ancestral woman my great grandmother, a Durlmangkarr woman was bitten [by a snake].\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx baw\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge shush\
\\re shush!\
\\re be quiet!\
\\de be quiet!, shush!\
\\xv Yoh yoh bonj bonj karri-kaybun, karri-kaybun baw!\
\\xe Yes, yes, that's it, that's what we shall do, let's not give any to her, we'll refuse to give any, quiet now [she's coming]!\
\\xv Wurdurd baw, wokyak!\
\\xe Hey kids, shush, be quiet!\
\\xv Baw, ngurri-ngurdme-n! Bulanj kabi-wok-mang Balang!\
\\xe Shush, be quiet all of you! Bulanj is making a voice recording of Balang!\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Bawalk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re placename\
\\de site on the route the fv:Nakorrkko heroes took which is also the location of a maggot sacred site\
\\xv Djang bedberre. Ya djalwam Manawukan kurrmeng Dukkurrdji bedberre Bawalk. Bawalk kabirrih-yime. Yoh Bawalk. Kang kurrmeng njamed rolk, rolk kurrmeng.\
\\xe It is their totemic emblem. Yes, they [the Nakorrkko] kept going to Maningrida and to Bawalk, a place belonging to the Dukkurrdji clan. They call it Bawalk. Yes, at Bawalk, they took it there, whatsit, they placed the maggot dreaming there.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bawon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge leave\
\\re leave OBJ\
\\re leave untouched\
\\re abandon\
\\sn 1\
\\de leave alone, leave untouched\
\\xv Yun ngurri-kilekme, ngurri-bawo!\
\\xe Don't touch it, leave it alone!\
\\xv Minj ngarr-bun, ya minj ngarr-bun ngarr-bawo kam-re ka-mulbardme ka-worrowkme ya kan-yilkan ngarrku nawu\
nawaran and ka-kolung, bu kan-dangbalhme ngarrku nungka kan-mang mimih.\
\\xe We don't harm them, we don't hunt those [supernatural] black wallaroos, we leave them alone when they come jumping along and they\
climb over our bodies, or those Oenpelli pythons and crawl down and slide over our bodies, otherwise the mimih will come and get us\
and enclose us [in their rocky caves].\
\\sn 2\
\\de abandon\
\\xv Ngandi-bawong.\
\\xe They left me.\
\\xv Ngayi nga-wam ngurrbenh-nang wanjh, ngurri-borlhmeng la kun-red bedberre, ngadberre kandi-yibawong.\
\\xe [addressing spirits of the deceased] I was together with them [when you were alive] and you saw them all and you all became familiar\
[with me] and their land, which is now our land which they have left to us [after their death].\
\\sn 3\
\\de part contact with OBJ\
\\xv Na-kimuk ngan-bawon.\
\\xe They [the trousers] are too big, they're falling down off me.\
\\sn 4\
\\de give up a previous habitual activity, stop\
\\xv Bakki nga-bawong.\
\\xe I've given up smoking.\
\\se baworren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\ge divorce\
\\re divorce\
\\de divorce each other\
\\xv Bonj bene-baworrinj.\
\\xe That's it, they've divorced.\
\\pdn -warnmorrhme\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bawurl\
\\ps n.\
\\de chicken, fowl\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\xv Nanikud ngarrikarrmi and bawurl ngarrikarrmi nawern.\
\\xe We had goats, and lots of chickens too.\
\\so Quoted in Etherington, Steve, \'91Learning to be Kunwinjku: Kunwinjku people discuss their pedagogy\'92, PhD Thesis, Charles Darwin University, 2006 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\bw from English \'91fowl\'92\
\\sd birds\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\\lx bayahme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\bw from English 'buy'\
\\re buy\
\\re purchase\
\\de purchase, buy\
\\xv A [to B]: [in English] So you'll get a good cheque for this one! C: Ba kan-yibayahme daluk. B: Bonj kaybun.\
\\xe A [to B]: [in English] So you'll get a good cheque for this one! C [to B, his joking relationship partner]: So you can buy a wife for me.\
B: I won't give you anything!\
\\sy dangduluburren fs:(rare)\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx baybay\
\\ps loc. adv.\
\\de Inside, within, deep down.\
\\xv Wanjh bikodjbayeng biyibkeng kanjdji wanjh bikani kanjdji bidjalngani [bidjalkani] kurorre baybay.\
\\xe Then it [the rainbow serpent] swallowed her head first and took her deep down into the earth.\
\\so The example phrase comes from some texts Peter Carroll has deposited with AIATSIS. \
\\xv Daluk baybayken.\
\\xe Women\'92s internal reproductive organs.\
\\se baybaywi\
\\de Inside, internally, within oneself.\
\\xe Ngalengman baybaywi djahdjalburrbuni.\
\\xe She knew within herself, was convinced of it.\
\\so Nawirridj, Grace & Rowe, Meryl (eds), \'92Karriburlume God: Kunwinjku Song Book\'92, Gunbalanya, 1985, p. 7.\
\\id DK\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx baye\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge bite\
\\re bite\
\\sn 1\
\\de bite\
\\xv Ngan-bidbaye.\
\\xe It's biting my finger.\
\\xv Birri-bayerrinj duruk.\
\\xe The dogs were fighting (biting each other).\
\\sn 2\
\\de cause an illness\
\\xv A: Kodjok kah-dowen. B: Njale bi-bayeng?\
\\xe A: Kodjok is sick. B: What happened to him [what made him ill]?\
\\pdn -lawme\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bayhke\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ng only attested in fv:mayalibayhke 'make OBJ realise something, enlighten'\
\\ge aware (cause to be)\
\\re open understanding (of object)\
\\de formative in fv:mayalibayhke 'make OBJ realise something, enlighten'\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bayhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ng only attested in fv:mimbayhme 'open eyes', transitive form is fv:bayhke, formative in fv:mayalibayhke 'make OBJ realise something'\
\\ge aware\
\\re aware (be)\
\\de formative in fv:mimbayhme 'open eyes, awaken'\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bayiddjirrekorrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge urinate\
\\re urinate (in Kundedjwarre clan lectr)\
\\de urinate\
\\uv Kundedjwarre clan lect\
\\un I= dilebun.\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx baykkuykkuykme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge spray.honey\
\\re spray honey (of bees)\
\\de spray honey (of bees), it is believed that honey bees spray honey with their mouthes into the hive\
\\xv Ka-baykkuykkuykme bodno.\
\\xe Bees spray honey (from their mouths).\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx baywal\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re plant (unidentified)\
\\de small herbaceous plant with an edible tuber said to be a larger variety of fi:Microstema_tuberosum\
\\xv Baywal, badjdjo an-kimuk.\
\\xe The fi:baywal plant is a big version of fi:Microstema_tuberosum.\
\\sc Microstema_tuberosum??\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bbolo\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kin.term\
\\re fi:kun-derbi kin term\
\\de fi:kun-derbi kin term, father of one of us, we call each other/you call me fv:ngal-kurrng\
\\xv Bu ngal-kurrng ngun-marneyime 'nabbolo' ngun-rdebikan ngabbard ke.\
\\xe If your wife's mother refers to 'nabbolo' that means she is using triangular kinship terminology in reference to your father.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bebbe-\
\\ps v. pref.\
\\va -bebbeh-\
\\de each, individually\
\\ng This verbal prefix has a distributive function which can include spatial separation. The 'distributive share' (see Evans 2003:497) can be\
focused on an intransitive or transitive subject but in some cases for the latter, also on the object and verb.\
\\xv Birri-bebbehwam.\
\\xe They each went on their own.\
\\xv Ngarrben-bebbewon.\
\\xe Let's give to each of them.\
\\xv Warddewardde, karri-djarrkningihni. Karri-bebbekarrmehkarrme kun-wardde dulumno.\
\\xe We people who live in the rock country, we each have our respective rocky regions of the plateau.\
\\xv Man-kung nawu yiman ka-yime ka-bebbengeybuyika nawu man-kung kardderre lorlbban nabiwo njalenjale.\
\\xe The varieties of honey for example each have a different name, such as fi:kardderre, fi:lorlbban, fi:nabiwo and so on.\
\\xv Bininj Kabirri-bebbehkarrme man-korle.\
\\xe Each man has a spear [or spears].\
\\xv Bene-bebbehmarnedjirdmarrinj daluk.\
\\xe Each of them stole the other's wife [i.e. two men, each stole the other's wife].\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bebbebeh\
\\ps adv.\
\\ge each.place\
\\re each place (from)\
\\de from or in each place\
\\xv Mani mak bebbebeh, ngalengman kunj birri-murrngdoyi dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe There was one of these [a grindstone] in each place and it was used for grinding kangaroo bones.\
\\xv Ka-bolarlmang bebbebeh ka-bore ka-bolarlmarren ka-bebbeboyarlarrme.\
\\xe The water divides into separate (drainage basins) and it spreads out flowing into different water courses.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx beberrk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge woodland\
\\re woodland forest\
\\ng reduplicated form of fv:man-berrk\
\\de large expanse of savanna woodland\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bebke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge reveal\
\\re reveal\
\\re bring out\
\\re take out\
\\sn 1\
\\de take out, bring out, reveal, cause to appear\
\\xv Yi-bebkemen bakki nguddangke nga-wungme!\
\\xe Take out your tobacco and I'll have a smoke!\
\\xv Barrk anwurrk kabi-bebke, ka-belenghmerren warre.\
\\xe The bushfires make the black wallaroos appear, and many of them will be there licking themselves [their burn wounds from the\
bushfire].\
\\sn 2\
\\de produce children\
\\xv Wamuddjan ngane-marren ngarridj la ngarridjdjan nga-bebke.\
\\xe I'll get married to a woman of fi:wamuddjan subsection and I'll have (produce) children of fi:ngarridj and fi:ngarridjdjan subsection.\
\\pdn -worrbayhke\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge come.out\
\\re come out\
\\re arrive\
\\sn 1\
\\de appear, arrive\
\\xv Birri-bebmeng.\
\\xe They're here (they have arrived).\
\\xv Dungbebmeng.\
\\xe The sun is up.\
\\xv Na-wernwarre wanjh kam-bebmeng kam-dokorrokmeng, 'Maladj, baleh ngundih-marneyimeng?'\
\\xe The older brother then turned up, came ahead and said,'Maladj what did they say to you?'\
\\xv 'Wirriwirriyak, kanh-na, wirriwirriyak na-bang ngan-marnebebmeng ngarrewoneng ngan-nguneng ngarrewoneng bi-nguneng warlang nuye.\
\\xe Wirriwirriyak, look at me, Wirriwirriyak, that wild killer appeared before us and ate ghost bat's wife.\
\\sn 2\
\\de go/come out of an enclosure or dwelling\
\\xv Yi-bebmen!\
\\xe Go outside!\
\\pdn worrbayhme\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bedberre\
\\ps pro.\
\\ge theyOBL\
\\re 3rd person plural exclusive oblique possessive pronoun\
\\re third person plural exclusive oblique possessive pronoun\
\\sn 1\
\\de theirs\
\\ng this first sense expresses basic possession of a noun\
\\xv dabborrabbolk kun-wok bedberre.\
\\xe This is the language of the ancestors.\
\\xv Duwa djangno bedberre, Durlmangkarr bedberre.\
\\xe It is a fi:duwa moiety totemic site, belonging to the Durlmangkarr clan.\
\\sn 2\
\\de for them, to them\
\\ng can express a benefactive function when there is no benefactive applicative [i.e.fv:-marne-] in the verb complex\
\\xv Ngadmanwali karri-kan bedberre.\
\\xe It's our turn to take it for them.\
\\xv Wardi yi-yolyolme bedberre Balanda.\
\\xe Explain it for those non-Aboriginal people.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bedda\
\\ps pro.\
\\ge them\
\\re them\
\\re third person augmented direct free pronoun\
\\ng Evans (2003:264) lists a number of common circumstances where free pronouns are used in combination with obligatory bound pronominal prefixes; in 'simple predicative constructions like ascriptives', in combination with the locative preposition fv:kure/kore, for special emphasis or contrast, as 'isolated elements in sentence fragments' and as aids for discourse tracking purposes. Additionally, the free pronoun can be used to identify a group by placing it after the name of a referent associated with or a member of the group. In this construction it is also a strategy for indirect reference as a postposition after a proper name (or a kin term) requiring the addressee to infer the identity of the referent by association with the directly named individual(s), (see last example below).\
\\de They, them.\
\\xv An-yawbawong kure bedda.\
\\xe He left me as a child with them.\
\\xv Ngarri-re rowk wanjh bedda kabirri-worhnan fi:because minj nangale ka-worhnan na-buyika.\
\\xe [When] we all go [i.e. when we die], then they will be responsible [for that land], because there is no one else left to look after it.\
\\xv Y\'e9ya Karaw\'e1yana-beh la Kungarre nakka wanjh bedberre Mankikki bedda |fi\{'all the way'\} ka-djale. Bad mani manekke bolkdadjmeng man-yunkurr mani wanjh mani bedberre Kurikuri. Nakohbanj ngundi-marneyolyolme\
Marlbbarrdji-ken. Birri-rawong Kamulkbarn. Nani bedda ka-rradjme Kamulkbarn-beh.\
\\xe From Y\'e9ya Karaw\'e1yana to Kungarre that belongs to them. It's Mankikki clan aggregate all the way.  But their estate cuts off before this island which belongs to the Kurikuri clan aggregate. This old man here and the others can tell you that it belongs to the Marlbbarrdji clan. They are neighbours for the Kamulkbarn clan for which the border is this way [points], that's where they finish, the Kamulkbarn clan.\
\\xv Bedda Nakorrkko bene-kabokurrmeng.\
\\xe The Nakorrkko [ancestral father and son heroes] placed the creek there.\
\\xv Kunekke kabirri-yime bedda.\
\\xe That's the kind of thing they [those people]  do.\
\\xv Nakka marrek ngundi-duyi. Kayakki birri-makmak Bangkarla bedda. \
\\xe He didn't get angry at you. No, they are good people, Bangkarla and his relatives.\
\\xv Konda, ngayi, wurdurd..... Abigail bedda. \
\\xe It\'92s me here children [calling on the phone]\'85 a relative of Abigail [i.e. infer > I am her father].\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bedde\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge quinine.tree\
\\re quinine tree\
\\re fi:Petelostigma_pubescens\
\\de quinine tree\
\\ee sometimes used as a dye for weaving to impart a greyish-blue colour to pandanus fibre\
\\sc Petelostigma pubescens\
\\uv I, W\
\\ur Djnj, Kdj = an-bedjdja, E= man-bedjdja\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx beddem\
\\ps n.\
\\ge glassfish.sp.\
\\re glassfish spp.\
\\de Glassfish species.\
\\sc Ambassis agrammus, Ambassis macleayi, Ambassis mulleri\
\\uv I\
\\sy nadjirrkku\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bedman\
\\ps pro.\
\\ge themselves\
\\re themselves, by themselves\
\\de themselves, by themselves\
\\ng This is a pronoun of the emphatic series (there being three kinds of free-standing pronouns: direct, oblique and emphatic). Evans\
2003:269 describes them as having a 'range of meanings according to grammatical and pragmatic context: reflexive, 'in return', 'alone'\
or exclusively and 'in contrast'. \
\\xv Bedman birri-malkrohrokni yiman yimerranj bedberre bu birri-bengkani birri-yimeng ngarrben-yidjahwon bu\
ngarri-djarrkname kunj njalenjale yi-burrbun manekke manu ngadman Bininj kadberre karreno.\
\\xe People would decide which clan country they should walk to, where they knew the people there in order to visit them and decide on a\
kangaroo fire drive or arrange other things that we Aboriginal people do as part of our cultural practice.\
\\xv An-barrarn, bedberre na-Waridjngu. Konda bedman na-Barabba Kurrkdjurle kunred nuye Wamud na-yik-Barabba.\
\\xe The gorge, it belongs to them, the Waridjngu clan. Here [however], it belongs to them [others], the Barabba clan and the man\
Kurrkdjurle, Wamud subsection who was a member of the Barabba clan [but is now deceased].\
\\xv Nakka bukka bedberre bedman na-Buyhmi.\
\\xe That [land] there belongs exclusively to the Buyhmi clan themselves.\
\\xv A: Dja Kunwinjku nawu kabarri-dangyohmi kabarri-yime kurdukadji? B: Ya, makka bedman kureh kilhken,\
Kunbarlanja kah-re: fi:raitab ngamed Kudjekbinj.\
\\xe A: And in Kunwinjku, the Dangyohmi dialect, they say fi:kurdukadji? B: Yes, that is what those lowland people say, from Oenpelli right\
up to Kudjekbinj.\
\\xv Daluk barri-wurlhkeng wanjh yiman kayime mak bininj bedman kabarriname warrekah. Ngadman makih daluk\
ngalmangeyi arri-bulewurlhke.\
\\xe It's women who do this burning just in the same way that men burn country too. We women use fire to find long neck turtles.\
\\xv Bedman barri-djawurrkdjobkerrinj bedberre.\
\\xe They all cut their own beards.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bedjdja\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge quinine.tree\
\\re quinine tree\
\\re fi:Petelostigma_pubescens\
\\de quinine tree\
\\xv An-bedde, la an-djimed an-balmed ka-ngun mimno ka-ngun. \
\\xe Quinine tree, and fi:Planchonella_pohlmaniana, fi:Planchonella_arnhemica. It [emu] eats the seeds of those.\
\\sc Petalostigma pubescens\
\\sy (m)an-bedde\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, E\
\\ur I, W = man-bedde\
\\sd plant\
\\p anbedjdjaPetalostigma pubescens.jpg, anbedjdja_fruit.JPG\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bedje\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sorghum\
\\re spear grass\
\\re sorghum grass\
\\re fi:Sorghum_intrans\
\\de spear grass\
\\sc Sorghum spp. \
\\ee There are about 12 species of sorghum in the Top End, the most common being fi:Sorghum_intrans.\
\\xv Ngaleng ngurrurdu dabuno ka-kurrme bu an-bedje ka-yawbardnjamedme ... mirrhlurrululhme.\
\\xe Emus can lay eggs when the spear grass is standing and whatsit... the sharp part of the seeds have appeared.\
\\pdn kerabilidja\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bedje\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spear.grass\
\\re spear grass\
\\re sorghum grass\
\\de generic term for sorghum grasses known as 'spear grass', but also specifically the fv:yirridjdja moiety variety which dries out and falls\
down earlier in the season before the fv:duwa moiety variety known as fv:mardadubba.\
\\xv An-bedje anbu duwa ka-bardbakme werrk, wanjh mardadubbawali ka-bardbakme, anbu yirridjdja.\
\\xe The fv:duwa moiety sorghum grass falls down first and then the fv:yirridjdja spear grass falls down afterwards.\
\\xv An-bedje konda ka-rrangen ka-bebme. Kaddum ka-djaledbebme kaddum nawu ka-kobun wanjh ka-bakke nungan\
deleng ka-kongun nani an-bedje. Nani nawu barrk ba-bakkeyi ngarri-yime korroko. Karlno ka-marnbun, kun-karl o\
kun-balem ka-marnburren, ane kundalk ka-ngun. Wanjh ka-balem dangen now. \
\\xe The spear grass appears and stands up. At the top, it just keeps growing and at the top it [the black wallaroo] breaks the grass down to\
eat the grass flowers of the spear grass. A long time ago we used to say 'The black wallaroo has broken down the spear grass." It\
makes the marrow grow in the kangaroo or it makes it fat, when it eats that grass. Then it is the time when it is really fat now.\
\\sd plant\
\\pdv kerabilidja\
\\sc Sorghum spp. \
\\ee There are about 12 species of spear grass, the most common being fi:Sorghum_intrans.\
\\p 200204101440359.TIFF\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bedjekbedjek\
\\ps n.\
\\de style of body decoration where the hand is dipped into wet ochre and then slapped onto the body or a leafy branch is dipped into wet ochre and then flicked across the body.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bedjekme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re apply paint to a surface\
\\de Apply paint to a surface, flick a liquid or viscous substance. Also used for the process of applying paint during screen printing (e.g. at Injalak Arts and Crafts in Gunbalanya).\
\\xv Karri-bedjekmerren delek karri-borrkke.\
\\xe Let's flick ourselves with white ochre and dance.\
\
\\lx beh\
\\ps loc.\
\\sn 1\
\\re from\
\\de From.\
\\xv Birrimwam Manawukan beh.\
\\xe They came from Maningrida.\
\\xv Konda beh, kore beh birriburrinj.\
\\xe They were fighting here, there and everywhere.\
\\sn 2\
\\re away\
\\de Away a bit further.\
\\xv Beh karrire.\
\\xe Let's just go over there.\
\\xv Yiwemen beh.\
\\xe Throw it just over there.\
\\uv E, I\
\\cf See also -bewh (W)\
\\sn 3\
\\pr na-, ngal-, man-\
\\re him/her just over there\
\\de Demonstrative with gender prefix indicating both referential and locational immediacy 'that one who has just been mentioned, just over there'.\
\\xv Nabeh kahdi.\
\\xe Him (the person just mentioned), he's just over there.\
\\xv A: Kamarrang kahdi? B: Nabeh.\
\\xe A: Is Kamarrang here? B: He's just over there.\
\\dt 08/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx bek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge death.adder\
\\re death adder\
\\re fi:Acanthiphis_praelongus\
\\de Death adder.\
\\sc Acanthiphis praelongus\
\\pdn ngalwirnyi\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I, E= berk\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx bekka\
\\ps n.\
\\ge file.snake\
\\re file snake\
\\re Arafura file snake\
\\re fi:Acrochordus_arafurae\
\\de Arafura file snake.\
\\sc Acrochordus arafurae\
\\pdn kk= 1. ngaldjangarabunebune 2. ngaldjangarakerlkkerlk\
\\uv W= kedjebe, Kdj= nawandak\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bekkan\
\\ps v.i./t.\
\\de 1.listen/hear\
\\xv Birri-ngeybom wanjh ngarri-ngey-bekkang. Wanjh ngarri-ngey-karrme kun-ngey nuye.\
\\xe They used these names and we used to listen, so now we've got its right names.\
\\xv Kuyin-bekkang "Mehme" yimeng konda "Mehme","Ah, Mehme Mehme baleh yi-rri?"\
\\xe He could only just hear Mehme calling out "mehme", "Oh, Mehme, Mehme where are you?"\
\\xv Wanawam man-kung bekkang, man-kung bekkang "boooong" kah-yime, bobbidj, bekkang\
kah-bume.\
\\xe He kept going and heard the sound of wild honey. He could hear the sound of the bees going\
"boooong".\
\\de 2. feel, touch\
\\pdn kk= marrngalahme\
\\cf manj-bekkan\
\\ce taste.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bekkarren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de consider, think about before making a decision.\
\\pdn kk= marrngalahmerren.\
\
\\lx belbme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de stick together, (as in one surface to another)\
\\xv ngan-belbme\
\\xe It's sticking to me.\
\\xv belbminj\
\\xe stuck together\
\
\\lx bele\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de White\
\\xv Kukbele.\
\\xe White skinned person.\
\\xv Kunngolbele.\
\\xe White clouds.\
\\sn 2 \
\\de Clean, clear.\
\\xv Manbobele.\
\\xe Clear water.\
\\se belemen\
\\de Become white or brighter in colour.\
\\id DK, entered into master 06/Sep/2016\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx bele\
\\ps n.\
\\de numbness, pins and needles, cramp\
\\xv Bele ngan-denge-karrme.\
\\xe I've got a cramp in my leg.\
\
\\lx Belebelkdjan\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in the Mankorlod estate south of Maningrida.\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Bele Kadjang\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de A section of cliff to the north of the kangaroo fire drive area at Kumirrkkowalak. This fire drive itself is just to the north of the Gunbalanya-Nabarlek road where it turns to the south after the Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek crossing. The name Bele Kadjang is probably a descriptive term for the Dreaming that is located at the site name proper of Kumirrkkowalak. The fv:djang (sacred site/dreaming) associated with the escarpment face is fv:bele \'91paralysis\'92. fv:Bele is a term used to describe the lack of sensation associated with various forms of paralysis, \'91pins and needles\'92 and numbness from extreme cold. Because of the latter, the site is sometimes also referred to as fv:Kun-bonjdjek \'91cold\'92. The site is also sometimes associated with the nearby name of Kumirrkkowalak. \
\\xv Kumirrkkowalak wanjh njamed ka-djangdi Bele.\
\\xe At Kumirrkkowalak, there is a whatsit, paralysis fv:djang \'91sacred site\'92.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\cf Kumirrkkowalak\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx belendjerre\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass sp.\
\\re grass sp.\
\\de kangaroo grass, kind of perennial grass which grows in dry rocky environments at the base of escarpments and scree slopes, favoured by antilopine kangaroos\
\\xv Belendjerre kure malalam kahdi kukebkali.\
\\xe fv:Belendjerre grass grows in the dry eucalypt areas at the base of rocky outcrops.\
\\xv Belendjerre kun-dalk anekke manu ka-dalkngun nawu karndayh yiman kurdubu ka-yime. Ka-balemkimukmen.\
\\xe Male and female Antilopine kangaroos eat fi:Themeda grass. They get fat on it.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Themeda spa. (including fi:Themeda_triandra)\
\\dt 25/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx belenghme\
\\va belengkme?\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\re lick, lick up\
\\de Lick.\
\\xe Duruk kumwam benmenebelenghmeng, dja yakminj.\
\\xv A dog came and licked them, then disappeared.\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997\
\\sn 2\
\\de Drink leaking or dripping fluid, lick up.\
\\xv ...yiman mankung kabore, karribelengkme.\
\\xe ...such as when honey dribbles, we lick it up.\
\\id DK\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx Belerrk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in <Wurrbbarn> clan estate\
\\uv E, D, Kun-dedjnjenghmi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx belerrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge gecko\
\\re gecko\
\\de Generic name for most geckos.\
\\sc Diplodactylus spp.\
\\uv I, W\
\\ur E= moloborndok\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx belewon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make something white, whiten\
\
\\lx belinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de duwa skin name (female)\
\\uv W= ngal-ngarridj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx belk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de pandanus tree\
\\xv Kundjikurdubuk man-belk ka-rri.\
\\xe At Kundjikurdubuk there is pandanus.\
\\sc Pandanus spiralis\
\\uv W\
\\od I= kun-dayarr, Kdj, Djnj=an-yakngarra\
\
\\lx belngdan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de subsiding of a swelling\
\\xv Kandiddjowa yi-wilkdeng ka-rung ka-lurlme. Kaluk karri-wilkmang ka-buhme\
ka-belngdan wanjh.\
\\xe You put a damper in the coals and it cooks and swells up. We get it out and it when it's cooled the\
swelling subsides.\
\\xv Nga-mok-belngdanj.\
\\xe The swelling on my sore has gone down.\
\\xv Ah yowyowmeng rowk wanjh belngdanj rowk mirrhno birri-mirrh-kudj-mey.\
\\xe The fluid came out and the swelling all went down and they took out the sharp splinter.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bembem\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Soles, particularly Selheim's Sole fish\
\\sc Brachirus selheimi possibly also Aseraggodes klunzingeri\
\\en duwa\
\\xv Minj karri-ngun bembem.\
\\xe We don't eat sole fish.\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx bembem\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de firesticks, used to make fire by friction\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde Kun-djahkorl\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx benbekad\
\\ps n.\
\\de daytime\
\
\\lx bende\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\pdv kk\
\\de spear grass\
\\pde man-bedje\
\\xv Man-mawul ka-murridjke man-bende.\
\\pde Kun-kurra ka-bakke man-bedje.\
\\xe The wind is knocking down the spear grass.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bene-\
\\ps pronom. pref.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Pronominal prefix that encodes 3rd person dual past tense, intransitive. Present form is fv:kabene-\
\\xv Bene-wam.\
\\xe They (both) went.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Pronominal prefix that encodes a 3rd person dual past tense subject acting on a 3rd person singular object.\
\\xv Bene-bom.\
\\xe They (both) hit him.\
\\sn 3\
\\de 3rd person dual predicate noun prefix.\
\\xv Bene-mimwarre.\
\\xe They both have poor eyesight.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Benebenemdi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in <Barabba> clan estate. This is a 'big place' name or large district name.\
\\ee Bolkngeybadjan\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx benname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Attach a handle on a dilly bag\
\
\\lx benno\
\\ps n.\
\\de Handle (of a basket or other container)\
\
\\lx bennja\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi term, eg.our (you and me) sibling\
\\ee eg. two brothers referring to another brother or two sisters about another sister.\
\
\\lx benuk\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\va benok\cf0 \
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\cf2 \\de Australian bustard or plains turkey, often referred to as a \'91bush turkey\'92\cf0 \
\cf2 \\sc \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ardeotis australis\
\\xv \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Korroko nawu dabborrabbolk minj ngandiwoyinj ngalbu benuk bu ngarringuyinj. Ngandimarneyimi ngahli mayh benuk minj ngurringun ngaldjamun. Benuk kakarrekan ceremony manbu Mardayin.\
\\xe In the past, the Old People didn't give us any bush turkey to eat though. They used to tell us we don't eat this bird, it's taboo because it's part of the Mardayin ceremony. \
\\so Andrew Manakgu, Injalak Arts painting documentation\
\\uv W= benuk, I= benok\cf0 \
\cf2 \\id MG, DK edits Aug 2016\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx benok ngurlno\
\\ps n.\
\\de Small smooth sacred stone decorated with painted designs representing the heart of the kori bustard\
and used in the <Mardayin> ceremony.\
\\lit 'heart of the kori bustard'\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx beng\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Faculty of understanding, cognition and sensibility.\
\\xv Minj ngarrben-ngeybun yabok wardi kun-beng.\
\\xe We don't say the names of our sisters as we find it offensive.\
\
\\lx beng\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de ritual payment of goods such as those given to clear silence relationships (<-marnewokyak>) or those\
generally given in most ceremonies.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bengbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Make distracting noise, annoy, disturb.\
\\xv Marrek bekkan, wurdurd kandi-bengbun.\
\\xe I can't hear you, those kids are making too much noise.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Offend or say something improper to somebody, particularly to talk with a man about his sister or to a woman about her brother.\
\\xv Ey, kan-bengbun!\
\\xe Hey, you're offending me i.e. Don't talk to me about my sister.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bengdayhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de notify, let someone know, remind\
\\xv Yim-ray kan-bengdayhke.\
\\xe Come and let me know.\
\
\\lx bengdayhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de remember something, be reminded of.\
\
\\lx bengdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de wait for a message, be aware\
\\xv A: Baleh birri-yimeng? B:Med kabirri-wokdi karri-bengdi.\
\\xe A:What did they say (decide)? B:Wait yet, they'll talk about it and we'll wait to hear what they say.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bengdubberran\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de forget something\
\\sy bengmikdan\
\
\\lx bengdulubun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Cause embarrassment or shame for someone by talking to them about their cross-sex sibling.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Explain something to someone with clarity.\
\\xv Nakka yi-bengdulubu ba ka-bengkan ba ka-kodjkurlubayhme.\
\\xe You explain it to him so he can understand and be enlightened.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bengkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1. understand, know,\
\\xv Yi-bengkan konda Kurrurldul yi-bengkan kah-yo Balang, la kaddum djang kah-di.\
\\xe You know here at Kurrurldul where Balang lives, well upstream from there is that sacred site.\
\\de 2.think\
\\xv Med ka-bengkan.\
\\xe Wait, she'll think about it.\
\\pdn kk= marrngalahme\
\\cf wernh-bengkan\
\\ce concentrate, think hard\
\\uv W=burrbun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bengkongi\
\\ps interj.\
\\de expression of sorrow or sympathy\
\\xv Worro bengkongi kuyinngakmeng wurdyaw.\
\\xe Poor thing, the child nearly drowned.\
\
\\lx bengmidjdan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re forget something\
\\de Forget something.\
\\xv \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Njamed, Borlokko, Borlokko Djang there, konda kah man-berrk, kabbal, kumekke ka-rri. Djal Borlokko djang, must be ka-bolk-ngeyyo bad nga-bolkbengmidjdanj only ngan-bolkbukkani bininj na-Wakadj.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl240
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\xe Whatsit, keelback freshwater snake, a keelback dreaming there, on this side [i.e. the western side of the Liverpool River] in the open plain country, that's where it is. It's just a keelback dreaming site. I think it must have a name [that place] but I forget what it is, I only know the place that na-Wakadj showed me.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\sy kodjmukmeng\
\\dt 08/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx bengwarr\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\re deaf\
\\de Deaf, hearing impaired.\
\\sn 2\
\\re heedless\
\\de Heedless person, one who doesn\'92t pay attention or take sensible advice, stupid person, unable to learn.\
\\pdn kk= kun-mardorrhyambah\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bengwarremen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re go crazy\
\\re dementia (develop)\
\\re Become mentally unstable, agitated, insane\
\\de Become annoyed or seriously irritated, develop dementia, become mad or insane, start to do stupid things.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\xv \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kanh-bengwarrewong, arri-bengwarreminj arri-djalni arri-burrbun Balanda-kenh.\
\\xe It has destroyed our well-being, we have gone crazy just sitting in one place only knowing non-Aboriginal culture.\
\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \\dt 20/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\cf2 \\lx bengwarrewon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re annoy\
\\re drive someone crazy\
\\re distract, confuse\
\\de Send mad, distract, annoy (due to disturbance, noise, irritation etc).\
\\xv \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kanh-bengwarrewong, arri-bengwarreminj arri-djalni arri-burrbun Balanda-kenh.\
\\xe It has destroyed our well-being, we have gone crazy just sitting in one place only knowing non-Aboriginal culture.\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\id DK, edits and xv MG\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx bengwoknan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de communicate a message or grab the attention of someone via a non-spoken channel\
\\ee This may include totemic beings speaking to people in auspicious forms such as a spirit being in an\
animal form trying to convey a message to a human.\
\\xv None yiken najawan na-buyika 'iiiiii' kan-borledmingun, "An-kung yi-nang?" 'iiiiiiiiiii'\
kan-bengwoknawoknan im go gulujapgulujap, ka-yime well ka-yime,"An-kung nga-nang\
kuni.\
\\xe Another honey spirit None in the form of a hornet comes along again and surrounds us making the\
buzzing sound 'iiiiiii'. "Have you seen a honey hive?" 'iiiiiii' it communicates to us by coming very close\
to us which means "I've seen honey over there".\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bengyire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1. go along paying attention, walk along listening carefully.\
\\de 2. daydream.\
\
\\lx bengyirri\
\\va bengyirriyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de listen carefully to sounds, pay attention to sounds\
\\xv Bengyirri wanjh kumekke bi-bekkang wokdi.\
\\xe He listened carefully and then he heard him speaking (in the distance).\
\
\\lx bengyolyolme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de teach, instruct (usually by a senior relative imparting serious information to a younger relative).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx benj\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge shrub.name\
\\re firestick plant\
\\re Wrightia saligna, Wrightia pubescens\
\\de kind of small tree (3-7m) which is used for fire-stick drills\
\\sc Wrightia saligna, Wrightia pubescens\
\\xv An-benj kun-darleh karri-burdebme, me-yak.\
\\xe The fi:Wrightia pubescens tree is a firestick drill tree we use to make fire, it has no\
edible parts.\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj= an-benj\
\\ur I, W, E= man-benj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx berd\
\\pr kun-\
\\va berdno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1.tail 2. valve on a tyre tube.\
\
\\lx berd\
\\pr man-\
\\va berdno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de penis\
\
\\lx berdbarle\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge glans\
\\re glans\
\\de glans penis\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx berdbarleburren\
\\va barleburren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\ge subincise\
\\re subincise\
\\de subincision of the penis\
\\xv Kah-barleburren, na-wu kureh koyehkoyekbeh ka-barleburren na-koyekken na-wu na-kure koyehkoyek.\
\\xe Those easterners, he's one of those [who] practise subincision, those easterners do that.\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx berdbarleyerdkerren\
\\va barleyerdkerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\ge expose.glans\
\\re expose glans penis\
\\de expose the glans penis by pulling back the foreskin\
\\xv Barleyerdkerrinj...[laughter] berdbarleyerdkerrinj. 'Ahh' nga-yimeng 'na-kurrngh nakka na-ngale' na-wu yi-bengkan\
barleburrinj.   \
\\xe He [metaphorically] exposed his glans penis [laughter] he made the prick come out. 'Oh', I said 'Cousin, what's this?', you know, the\
'prick' of the spear (the split spear shaft) had been pulled out (the joke is an analogy with subincision).\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Berdberd\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan with territory on the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Nayuhyungki nawu nungan ba-ngehngeybuni bu bah-djangweyi. Ngabbard barri-djangweyi, na-Mok na-Berdberd. Ngayi mak bolkki nga-midjbun. Bad marrek kandi-midjbun ngandi-burrknan nawu kun-red nga-re.\
\\xe The first ancestors called their names and performed increase rituals for them [nectar-bearing flowering trees]. My father [and his\
brothers] performed increase rituals, they were of Mok and Berdberd clans. Today I don't recognise some [of the places]. But they [the\
ancestors] still recognise me as I go about the country.\
\\ee the Berdberd clan fv:kun-dangwok interjection is fv:belkngun\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 17/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx berd-dadjke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de circumcise\
\
\\lx berddaykan\
\\va ka-rraykan\
\\ps n.\
\\de circumcised 'young man'\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx berddubbe\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dickhead\
\\re dickhead, stupid prick\
\\de Mild profanity, something like 'dick head' or 'stupid prick' (not in polite usage).\
\\xv Yi-berddubbe!\
\\xe You stupid dickhead!\
\\dt 30/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx berddjenj\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de 'having a tail like a fish', synonym for <ngal-kunburriyaymi>\
\\lit "female-fish-tail"\
\\cf see <ngal-kunburriyaymi>\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Berddolkko\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name Kumarrirnbang Creek region\
\\de Confluence of creeks around 7km east of Ngalurdbirrhmi. The water winds west-northwest from here to become Kumarrirnbang Creek (appearing on topographic maps as \'91Manggabor Creek\'92) which flows past Kumarrirnbang outstation. Berdolkko is on an important traditional walking route. \
\\xv Mirurr arriyoy wanjh malahmalayi Ngalurdbirrhmi arriyoy. Kumekkebeh barrhbuni wanjh Berddolkko arriwam arriyoy arriderrehmi Mibarra. Kumekke arriyoy karrbarda arringuni wanjh arriderrehmi Kamanemdi. Kumekke-beh arridolkkayi arriwam Yolngbuyken. Malayi arridjalbolkyurrhkeyi Nadjabba, Kurrbbirnbaleng arriyoy. Nadjabba bim nakuken.\
\\xe We camped at Mirurr and then in the morning we went to Ngalurdbirrhmi and camped there. From there, at first light we walked to Berddolkko and then moved further to Mibarra. We camped there and ate long yams and then coninued on to Kamanemdi. From there we set off for Yolngbuyken. The next morning we would walk past Nadjabba and arrive at Kurrbbirnbaleng where we would camp. Nadjabba is a an important rock art site.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx berdkalme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge erection\
\\re erect penis\
\\de (of males) Have an erection.\
\
\\lx berdkilkilno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de tail meat, especially of reptiles such as goanna and crocodile.\
\
\\lx berd-kimuk\
\\ps n.\
\\de 'big prick' (not in polite usage)\
\\sy berd-badjan\
\
\\lx berdkodjkimuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de glans penis\
\
\\lx berdkurlahno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de foreskin\
\
\\lx berdkurlba\
\\ps n.\
\\ge black.whip.snake\
\\re black whip snake\
\\re whip snake\
\\re fi:Demansia_atra\
\\de Black Whip Snake (lit: 'tail blood')\
\\sc Demansia atra\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= djenbedjek, namu, W= namung\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 01/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx berd-nud\
\\ps n.\
\\de uncircumcised\
\\xv Ngalelek birri-berdnudwi biri-wam la Na-korrkko nakka bene-rraykang.\
\\xe The Corela ancestors went uncircumcised but the Nakorrkko father and son were circumcised.\
\\uv E\
\\uv W= djabinj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berd-nguneng\
\\pr nga-\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'oh the dear little thing', 'oh isn't it cute'.\
\
\\lx berl\
\\ps n.\
\\de stick tobacco, distributed to Aboriginal people by Balandas during the early days of European\
influence in Arnhem Land.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berl\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1.arm\
\\xv Kun-berl ngan-marne-bom.\
\\xe He broke my arm.\
\\de 2. Branch 3. Wing.\
\\pdn kk= kun-barndja\
\\nt check kk.\
\
\\lx berlbban\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de long stone point type used as a spear tip, replaced by <barrawu> steel 'shovel nose' tips.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berldowkmurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de humerus (upper arm bone).\
\
\\lx berldowkno\
\\va kun-berldowk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de bicep.\
\\xv Yi-berldowk-kimuk.\
\\xe You've got big biceps.\
\
\\lx berldukkarren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\ge put.on.armband\
\\re put on armband\
\\de put an armband on (one's self), tie on a bracelet on (one's self)\
\\xv Njamed dile ngarri-nami dile. Kuneh ngarriyime ngarri-berldukkaren ngarri-nami.\
\\xe Whatsit, the kangaroo bladder armbands. We would put those armbands on our arms.\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx berle\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de dew\
\
\\lx berlehberlongke\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my wife, your auntie, you are my <kakkak>.\
\\cn ngaluka.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berlekowurd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my sister, your <kakkak>, we call each other, <kakkak>.\
\\cn ngal-mulebe.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berlhberlhbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de play clapsticks\
\\pde berlhberlhme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx berlhberlhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de play clapsticks\
\\xv Man-berlnginj mani karri-berlhberlhme manikke, Mongerrh kanah-kang ngorrkang wanjh.\
\\xe Clap sticks, those we use for tapping (for music), Mongerrh carried them up on his shoulder.\
\\pdn kk= berlhberlhbonghme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berl-kan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de take by the arm.\
\
\\lx berlkanj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de arm muscles.\
\
\\lx berlkurrkurrbme\
\\cf see <kurrkurrbme>.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berlmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\re Take by the arm, lead someone along.\
\\de Take by the arm, lead someone along.\
\\xv \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ngudda ngurri-ray ngayi kondanj nga-yo ngurri-nan kam-barrhbubarrhbun ngurrim-re kandi-berlmang kandi-berlkakan karri-re.\
\\xe You all go away, I will sleep here. When you see the sun rise, come and get me take me by the arm. Take me by the arm and we\'92ll go off. (Wurrurrumi song text by Kevin Djimarr)\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\xv None alenge an-berlmangi kan-marrkinjmangi wanjh an-kung ba-bengkani.\
\\xe That None wasp would come with a message for us because she knew about the honey [the\
place to find it]. (Djnj)\
\\sn 2\
\\re arrest\
\\de Arrest.\
\\xv Wardi djamun kamre ngunberlmang.\
\\xe Otherwise the police will come and arrest you.\
\\id DK, edits MG 08/Sep/2016\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx berlmurrngno\
\\va kun-berlmurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de upper arm\
\
\\lx berlno\
\\va kun-berl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1. arm, 2. branch\
\
\\lx berlnginj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de clap sticks for musical accompaniment, usually made of ironwood <man-dubang>.\
\
\\lx berlu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my auntie ie. <berlu>, your sister-in-law ie. <kanjok>, we call each other\
<kakkak>.\
\\cn wurdngarrku.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berlu\
\\va berluh (voc.)\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de aunty, FZ\
\
\\lx berluh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de aunty (vocative).\
\
\\lx berluhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de call OBJ aunty/ mother-in law\
\
\\lx berlunghkowarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my older brother, your grandson (daughter's son), we call each other\
<mamamh>. 2.my older brother, your <kakkak>, you are my <kakkak> ie. mother's mother.\
\\cn na-mulebe.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berlunghkowurd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. a woman talking to her <kankinj> (BS/BD ie. nephew/niece) or her <kakkak>\
(DS/DD ie. grandchild) and refering to her sister.\
\\xv Ngarduk berlungkowurd.\
\\xe My little same-sex sibling (said to other same-sex sibling)\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berluwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg., 1.my wife, your auntie (father's sister), you are my nephew. 2.my wife, your <berlu>, we are same sex siblings\
\\cn ngaluka.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berlwernmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de grow many branches.\
\
\\lx berlwon\
\\ps v. ditransitive.\
\\de (father) give daughter in marriage.\
\
\\lx berl-yilno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de veins in arm\
\
\\lx bernalkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de carry by handle over the shoulder\
\\xv Kun-yirrk ka-bernalkan.\
\\xe She's carrying a dilly bag on her shoulder.\
\
\\lx bernbern\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ghost.gum\
\\re ghost gum\
\\re fi:Corymbia_bella\
\\de Ghost gum\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_bella\
\\uv I, W, \
\\ur Djnj= an-korlokkorlo\
\\pdn kk= man-yarrayan\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 22/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bernbern\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge salmon.gum\
\\re salmon gum\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_alba\
\\de salmon gum\
\\sc Eucalyptus alba\
\\xv Kun-dulk an-burluddak, an-balanjdjarra an-dadjek yerrikahwi an-bernbern ani an-ngamed an-bernbern manih ya an-njilinjbirrk\
\\xe All the flowering trees [from which fi:Tetragonula bees get nectar include...] - stringy bark, Darwin woolybutt, fi:Grevillea_pteridifolia, fi:Eucalyptus_alba, fi:Xanthostemon_eucalyptoides\
\\sd plant\
\\pdv in Kuninjku, the kun-kurrng register name for this tree is fv:man-yarrayan but in Kundedjnjenghmi, fv:an-yarrayan is used as one of the names for fi:Corymbia_polysciada which is much more common on parts of the Arnhem Land plateau in Kundedjnjenghmi country.\
\\uv Djnj, W, I\
\\ur\
\\un The white barked eucalypts are subject to much confusion in identification. Kuninjku speakers will often refer to\
fi:Corymbia_bella as fv:man-bernbern, but fv:man-korlkkorlk is another name in Kuninjku for this tree. In Kundjeyhmi, the name fv:an-komborloh is sometimes used for\
fi:Eucalyptus_alba, but more commonly for fi:Corymbia_polysciada.\
\\dt 26/Jul/2010\
\
\\lx Bernberndulh\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx berber\
\\ps n.\
\\de mushroom, toadstool or other large fungi.\
\
\\lx berelh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de pubic covering made from bark of Kurrajong trees\
\\xv Berelh, yo marebu birri-barrhburrimeninj yiman ka-yime 'djordben-yak' la nakka\
birri-barrhburrimeninj. Birri-rayinj lahlarrk. Burlnjin yiman. Berelh man-budbud\
birri-buyi birri-marnbuyi.\
\\xe They used to cover themselves with pubic coverings and pandanus mats when there were no clothes.\
They used to go around naked. Just like the pubic coverings called <burlnjin>. They used to make\
<berelh> pubic coverings from Kurrajong fibre.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berelh\
\\ps n.\
\\re stingray\
\\de Generic name for river stingrays.\
\\uv Kune, Rembarrnga, Dalabon\
\\ur W= nawarlah\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 03/Mar/2016\
\
\\lx berelhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de squash the insides out of OBJ.\
\
\\lx berhbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\cf formative in <dabu-berhbun>\
\\de hatch from an egg\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berhke\
\\ps v.\
\\de lift ceremonial restrictions on food\
\\xv Minj ka-ngun djenj, la birri-berhkeng wanjh bonj nguneng.\
\\xe He wasn't allowed to eat fish and then they lifted the restriction and it was OK for him to eat it then.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge death.adder\
\\re death adder\
\\re fi:Acanthiphis_praelongus\
\\de Death adder.\
\\sc Acanthiphis praelongus\
\\pdn ngalwirnyi\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W, Kdj= bek\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berkmarnbun\
\\va bekmarnbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge make.mash\
\\re mash vegetable into pulp\
\\de pound a vegetable food into a soft mash\
\\xv An-burda arri-dong arri-bekmarnbun.\
\\xe We pound the fi:Curculigo_ensifolia tuber to make a mash.\
\\uv I, E=berkmarnbun, W, Djnj= bekmarnbun\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx berkno\
\\va bekno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de mashed edible vegetable such as mashed tuber\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx berr\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Fun, just joking, humour.\
\\xv Njale ngurri-djekme? Ngad kun-berr ngarri-djekme.\
\\xe What are you laughing about? We're just having a joke.\
\
\\lx berradjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\agr man-\
\\de rice\
\\bw from Makassarese = berasa 'milled rice'\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berre\
\\pr kun-\
\\va berreno\
\\ng incorporable\
\\ps n.\
\\ge chest\
\\re chest\
\\de chest, of human or animal\
\\xv An-balem manbu ngalengman ka-warre, yiman an-kurrk bah-djelhmi manekke ngandi-marneberredadjkeng. \
\\xe There's lots of fat [in the emu meat], and the juice drips out from the chest [meat] they cut for me.\
\\pdn kun-romed\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx berrebabi\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de moon\
\\pde dird.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx berrebberreb\
\\ps n.\
\\ge masked.lapwing\
\\re masked lapwing\
\\re fi:Vanellus_miles\
\\de Masked lapwing.\
\\xv Name kan-mulewan berrebberreb bu ngarri-warlbun.\
\\xe That masked plover sings out and lets animals know that we are approaching when we go hunting.\
\\xv Berrebberreb ngad duwa.\
\\xe The masked lapwing is for we fv:duwa moiety people.\
\\sc Vanellus miles\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx berrebbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.claim ownership over\
\\xv Nakkan duruk yaw ngardduk. Ngayi werrk nga-berrebbom.\
\\xe That puppy is mine. I was first to claim it.\
\\xv Kan-yingkihberrebbom.\
\\xe He claimed us from the start.\
\\de 2. promise (object to indirect object)\
\\xv Ngan-berrebbom manme.\
\\xe He promised to give me food.\
\\de 3. promise to give a woman or girl in marriage.\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx berreboyen\
\\ps n.\
\\de Kune name used to describe Mayali dialects said to be<na-kerlk> or 'soft'.\
\\uv E\
\\sy kun-dangburddjikaberrk, kun-dangyohmi.\
\\uv I= burrkyak.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx berredjalkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de food get stuck in throat when eating or swallowing incorrectly resulting in a fit of coughing which is taken as an indication that a\
relative has experienced some misfortune.\
\\xv Bu ngarri-berredjalkmeng ngarri-yime kare na-kudji bolkyakminj wanjh ngulam karri-bengyirri.\
\\xe If we get food stuck when eating we say that someone has had an accident, been injured or died and the next day we'll hear the news.\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx berrekalkno\
\\va kun-berrekalk\
\\sy kun-berre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de chest\
\
\\lx berrekuykme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr berre 'chest' -kuykme 'to spray from mouth'\
\\ge chest.spray\
\\re mother's country relationship\
\\de be in matrilineal relationship with OBJ\
\\ng This is a transitive verb allowing subject-object pronominal prefixes. \
\\xv Yoh, ngayi Kun-Kardbam berrekuykme yoh. Ngudda mak kan-berrekuykme, ngudda na-Kardbam, yoh.\
\\xe Yes, my mother's clan is Kardbam, yes your clan is my matriline. You in turn call my clan your matriline, you are Kardbam clan, yes\
[two people whose respective patriclans are the matriline of the other].\
\\ee This expression, meaning literally 'spray the chest of OBJ', most likely has its etymology in the spraying or dribbling of breast milk by\
a baby on its mother's chest. Its use denotes the genealogical descent relationship (in a wider sense than -yawmey ) between the subject\
and the clan of an object referent.\
\\sd kinship\
\\so Mick Kubarkku\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx berremarddarda\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de sternum\
\
\\lx berremudno\
\\va kun-berremud\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de chest hair\
\
\\lx berrerdberrerd\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rainbow.bee-eater\
\\re rainbow bee-eater\
\\re fi:Merops_ornatus\
\\de rainbow bee-eater\
\\sc Merops ornatus\
\\xv Nakka na-kukmakukmak None nawu. Berrerdberrerd warridj an-kung ba-nani.\
\\xe That Bembix wasp is excellent [ie it knows where honey is]. The rainbow bee eater too looks out for honey hives.\
\\xv Namekke mayh berrerd-berrerd narri-ngeybun. Nawu ka-karrme yiman kun-djakkorl ku-berd, berdno kore ku-rredjmud, ka-karrme kun-djakkorl, korroko. \
\\xe This bird we call berrerd-berrerd. It is the one with a pair of fire drills for its tail, it has long tail feathers, these being fire sticks from long ago [in the traditinal story].\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Berrerdberrerd Borrkkeng\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Waterfall in a long and steep gorge with deep water above the Goomadeer River. A creek meets the Goomadeer River from the west at Kunyikuymi, and Berrerdberrerd Borrkkeng is located around 2.5km up this creek. The site name means \'91Rainbow bee-eater (Merops ornatus) danced.\'92\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx berrewoneng\
\\ps pron.\
\\de them (2), theirs (2)\
\
\\lx berre-yukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hollow chest, having a depression in the chest.\
\
\\lx berrk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de dry woodland or open plain country with little water or no watercourses.\
\\xv An-berrk boyak, yiman ka-yime ku-rorrbo.\
\\xe The open plain country where there is no water, in open country (few or no large trees/shrubs).\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx berrk\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps n.\
\\de outside, in the open, open country\
\\xv Ku-berrk karri-yo wardi karri-ladmen.\
\\xe Let's sleep outside otherwise we'll get hot.\
\
\\lx berrk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de 1.outside, the open 2.dry country, desert\
\\xv Ngarrih-nang man-berrk bidbom kinga.\
\\xe We saw that the crocodile had climbed up and out in the open (ie. out of the water).\
\\cf man-beberrk\
\\ce very dry place, big open expanse of country\
\\sy kuberrk-kombuk\
\
\\lx berrkken\
\\pr +pronominal prefix\
\\de from the inland regions ie. not from the coast\
\\xv Nga-berrk-ken.\
\\xe I'm from the inland area.\
\
\\lx berrkdubbe\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dense.forest\
\\re dense forest\
\\de Very dense savanna forest.\
\\xv An-berrkdubbe an-djuyh.\
\\xe Savanna with very dense fi:Corymbia_bleeseri coverage.\
\\sd plant\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 01/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx berrkmarren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de place where two named locations meet up at an open plain\
\\xv ..... ka-balhdurndeng nani kanjdji ka-reh Ngaldaddubbe kondah, Ngaldaddubbe\
Nakarluwakarluwa kaban-berrkmarren\
\\xe .... it goes back down to Ngaldaddubbe here where Ngaldaddubbe and Nakarluwakarluwa meet\
together in open plain country.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Berrngarn\'9c\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in <Wakmarranj> clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee 'firestick place' (DK)\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx bewh\
\\ps loc.\
\\re further\
\\de Further, further along.\
\\gn Probably derived from the ablative fv:beh \'91away\'92.\
\\xv Kondah kore karrihni dja borledmikenh kore Nimbabbirr dja bewh kurredjdubbe kabbal kabolkngeyyo Wurrmarninj.\
\\xe On the other side of Nimbabbirr from where we are here, and further down to the very end of the floodplain, that place is called Wurrmarninj.\
\\so Andrew Manakgu, Injalak Arts painting documentation\
\\id DK\
\\dt 14/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx bewi\
\\ps instr.\
\\re instrumental suffix \'91with\'92\
\\de Instrumental suffix \'91with\'92. This form is only used by a very few individuals. Peter Carroll records that it \'91'has an optional use amongst one clan group, who are from the north-western part of the Kunwinjku area. It is known and not used by some speakers and not known by other speakers' (Carroll 1976:101, quoted in Evans 2003, 151-2). \
\\xv Bininj danjbom namarnkol djalakkirradj-bewi.\
\\xe A man speared a barramundi with a wire spear.\
\\xv Bininj dulubom manimunak mako-bewi.\
\\xe A man shot a magpie goose with a shotgun/rifle.\
\\xv Bininj karrukkan djalakkirradj kunyarl-bewi.\
\\xe A man will tie the wire spears with string.\
\\dt 08/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx Bewkbewk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\re spirit being\
\\de Ancestral being, said to be the progenitor of fv:mako 'didjeridu'.\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 03/Oct/2014\
\
\\lx bewkbewkme\
\\va berewkberewkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd weather\
\\de (of wind) to blow in a seasonal wind pattern\
\\xv Kudjewk, dalukorro ngarri-yime dalukorro, wanjh ka-bukabukmen mandjewk kangurdme\
'stop' ka-yime, dalukorro. Kangurdmerren rowk. Wanjh koyekbe kaberewkberewkme.\
\\xe In the wet season. We say at dry season (south-) east wind time it dries up the rain and the rain stops.\
The rain ceases completely. And then the easterly winds start up.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx beyngu\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, my younger brother, your <mamamh>, you and I call each other <mamamh>.\
\\cn na-djakerr.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx beywurd\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de offspring, ie.son or daughter, referent term only\
\\xv Ngarri-bebeywurd nguddangke rowk.\
\\xe We are all your children.\
\
\\lx bibe\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, mother talking to her child about the child's <kakkak> (MM, MMB).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bid\
\\pr kun-\
\\va bidno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1. finger 2. hand. 3. trigger of gun 4. any button-like object, especially on electronic appliances.\
\\xv Nanin bidno yi-djuyme.\
\\xe Push this button here.\
\\pdn kk= kun-kundam.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bidbard\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de knuckle, finger joints.\
\\dt 21/Apr/2004\
\
\\lx bidbardno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de knuckle\
\\dt 21/Apr/2004\
\
\\lx bidbawon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de die and leave close family behind in grief\
\\xv Ngan-bidbawong nga-koynguneng.\
\\xe He has left me behind (ie. the one I raised 's/he who used to hold on to me').\
\\dt 21/Apr/2004\
\
\\lx bidlarrk\
\\ps adj.\
\\re empty handed\
\\de Empty handed.\
\\xv Wanjh nunganwali wurdyaw kamayhmakmen kadjalre nawu kambun mayh. Kaluk minj bidlarrk kamdurndeng.\
\\xe The child in turn will become a good hunter, he just goes and gets an animal, and he never comes back empty handed.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\so Quoted in Etherington, Steve, \'91Learning to be Kunwinjku: Kunwinjku people discuss their pedagogy\'92, PhD Thesis, Charles Darwin University, 2006 \
\\id DK\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\\lx bikmarren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Take a splinter out\
\\xv Ngabidbikmarren.\
\\xe I\'92m taking the splinter out of my hand.\
\\id DK\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx bidbimyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de (hand stencil painting) be\
\\xv Bindi-bidkuykmeninj wurdurd an ngandi-bidkuykmeninj ngadberre nakka wanjh\
bidbimyobimyo.\
\\xe They used to make hand stencils of the childrens' hands and they made hand stencils of us (when we\
were children), and there they (the paintings) are there.\
\\dt 21/Apr/2004\
\
\\lx bidbirndok\
\\va birnbirndok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pardalote\
\\re pardalote, black-headed\
\\re fi:Pardalotus_striatus\
\\de two species of northern pardalotes (striated pardalote and black-headed pardalote); makes a nest in horizontal ground burrow (about 2 ft long) in soft earth or in tree hollows.\
\\sc Pardalotus striatus; Pardalotus striatus melanocephalus\
\\uv E, I\
\\ur Kdj= djornhdjornduk\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bidbodmeno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de back of hand\
\\dt 21/Apr/2004\
\
\\lx bidbokenh\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de ten (literally 'two hands').\
\
\\lx bidbolidj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de lines on palm of the hand\
\
\\lx bidbuhmerren\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge blow.hand\
\\re rain stopping ritual\
\\de blow heavily on hand as it passes from under the arm as a ritual to stop rain\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv 'dabborrabbolk kandikongibun' arriyime, wanjh arringenmarren arribidbuhmerren.\
\\xe We call out to the old people 'Have pity on us old people' and then we take our underarm smell with our\
hand and blow on it heavily (in order to stop heavy rain).\
\\xv Arribidbuhmerren wanjh arriyime 'Yiray albinjbalak kahdi'. Andjewk arrimarneyime.\
\\xe We blow our underarm smell and call out 'Go away from here, your mother-in-law is nearby'. We say\
that to the storm.\
\\ee The illustrative sentence here refers to the practice of mother-in-law avoidance. People tell the lightning\
spirit that his mother-in-law is nearby and therefore he should move away (thereby sparing people from\
the violent weather he creates).\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 18/Aug/2004\
\
\\lx bidbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1. climb up\
\\xv Nani yi-na bobbidj, la nga-bidbun wanjh nga-rradje.\
\\xe Look at that wild honey, alright I'll climb up and cut it out.\
\\de 2. leave camp to enter a ceremonial place.\
\
\\lx bidbuyhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lift up an object\
\
\\lx bidbuyhmiwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lift up an object (usually a heavy object).\
\\xv Birri-dulubom na-manjwarre, doweng wanjh birri-bidbuyhmiweng kure kulabbarl.\
\\xe They shot the crocodile, it died and then they pulled it up out of the billabong.\
\
\\lx bidbuyhwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lift something up\
\\sy -wayhke\
\
\\lx biddengdeng\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.name\
\\re kind of plant\
\\de kind of plant\
\\sc Calycopeplus casuarinoides\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur Djnj= manjalkmanjalk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx biddeyhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de clicking of a trigger on a firearm such as when the firearm does not discharge\
\\xv Yimarnek nga-rrulubuyi, la biddeyhmeng, minj dowkmeninj.\
\\xe I tried to shoot but the trigger just clicked without it (the gun) discharging.\
\
\\lx biddolkkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de raise hand\
\\xv Yi-biddolkka!\
\\xe Raise your hand.\
\
\\lx biddurrangkan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de generic term for two dolphin species; 1. Australian snubfin dolphin, 2. Australian humpback dolphin. \
\\xv Biddurangkan ka-bobuhme.\
\\xe Dolphins blow water [from their blow-holes].\
\\sc 1. Orcaella  heinsohni\
\\sc 2. Sousa  chinensis\
\\ur Iwaidja= bidurrangkan\
\\dt 01/Feb/2012\
\
\\lx biddjuyme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de push with finger, poke\
\
\\lx bidkanjno\
\\va kun-bidkanj\
\\ps n.\
\\re palm of hand\
\\ge palm\
\\de palm of hand\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\lx bidkarrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re hold someone\'92s hand\
\\de Hold someone\'92s hand.\
\\xv Wanjh ngarrimangi kedjebe, ngarridjuhmi. Ngarrikeleni. Kandibidkarrmi Ngalbangardi, Nakamarrang wanjh\'85 Ngarrimangi nawu kedjebe ngandibidkarrmi wanjh ngarrimangi.\
\\xe So we would collect file snakes, wading in the water. We were scared. They used to hold our hands, Ngalbangardi, Nakamarrang, so\'85we would be collecting the filesnakes with them holding our hands.\
\\so Quoted in Etherington, Steve, \'91Learning to be Kunwinjku: Kunwinjku people discuss their pedagogy\'92, PhD Thesis, Charles Darwin University, 2006\
\\se bidkarrmerren\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\ps v.refl.\
\\de Hold each other\'92s hands.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\id DK\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\\lx bidkawang\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Aneilema\
\\re fi:Aneilema_siliculosum\
\\re fi:Aneilema_siliculosum\
\\de small herb from rock country with edible tubers\
\\sc Aneilema siliculosum, Aneilema sp. Cannon Hill\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Murdannia.graminea\
\\re fi:Murdannia_graminea\
\\de Erect, slender perennial herb to 60 cm high with grass-like linear leaves with blades 50-300 mm x long x 2-11 mm wide, sheathing at the base with a pointed tip. The flowers are white to mauve, 3 petals, approximately 20 mm diameter, in terminal sprays. The cylindrical stem tubers are eaten raw or lightly roasted in fv:bangkerreng.\
\\sc Murdannia graminea\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sy bidkalkberd, an-bidkalkberd\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bidkenwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge hand.over\
\\re hand over something to someone\
\\xv Bi-rradjuy bi-bidkenwong kun-madj wanjh wam wanjh bi-madbom rerri.\
\\xe She gave it to him, she handed over the basket and he went off and she waited for him.\
\\uv E\
\\sn 2\
\\ge hand.over\
\\re hand over a gift in formal ritual\
\\de Formally present a gift in ceremonial ritual whereby the recipients all lay their hands on the ground, each hand on top of the next, and the gift is placed on top.\
\\xv Marradjiri ngandi-bidkenwong.\
\\xe They gave us the fv:marradjiri ceremonial pole in a formal presentation.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bidkuk\
\\ps n.\
\\de clumsy person, someone who easily breaks things by fiddling with them.\
\
\\lx bid-kurrmerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de make hand print\
\\pdn kk= kundam-djarrberlkerren.\
\
\\lx bid-kuykmerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de make hand stencil by spraying ochre from one's mouth.\
\\xv dabborrabbolk kun-kare birri-bid-kuykmerrinj konda kure kun-wardde.\
\\xe A long time ago, the old people sprayed (ochre) over their fingers here on this rock.\
\\pdn kk= kondam-kuykbonghmerren.\
\
\\lx bidmak\
\\ps adj.\
\\re skilled\
\\re dexterous\
\\ge finger_good\
\\de manually skilled, dexterous or clever\
\\xv Ka-kobun wo ka-rrahkendong an-kung. Bidmak nakka nungan yimerranj. Bidmak an-kung ka-rrahkendong.\
\\xe The flowers bloom and (the bees) fill their hives with honey. They have become skilled creatures. They are clever the way they can fill\
the hives with honey.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bid-marren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de shake hands\
\\xv Balanda kabindi-bid-marren.\
\\xe Non-aboriginal people shake hands with each other.\
\
\\lx bidmirrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de palm of hand\
\\sy bid-kanjno.\
\
\\lx bidmirrkkanj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de heel of hand.\
\
\\lx bidno\
\\va kun-bid\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1. finger 2. hand. 3. trigger of gun 4. any button-like object, especially on electronic appliances.\
\\xv\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bid-ngalanjno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de fingernail\
\
\\lx bidngalng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de index finger\
\
\\lx bidwidju\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de point with finger\
\
\\lx bid-worr-re\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hands sneaking up in readiness to snatch.\
\\xv Wanjh bo-ri-kang wam bonguhbonguneng, bonguneng konda kureh yimeng wurrngyiyoy,\
wurrngihwurrngiyoy bonguhbonguneng la bedda bene-djal-wabwabmeng molkno na-kudji\
kam-bidworrwam,"djikirrh", bi-karrmeng bi-djorrh-dukkang kondah.\
\\xe He then went for water and was drinking with his face down to the water like this. He kept drinking\
with his face down to the water whilst the others were off moving from place to place. Then he (a killer\
mimih) secretly moved his hands out to grab him, 'snatch', he grabbed him and held him around the\
waist here.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bid-yawyaw-kimuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de thumb\
\
\\lx bid-yayahwurd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de other small fingers (pointer, middle and ring fingers)\
\
\\lx bidyayaw-yahwurd\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de little finger\
\
\\lx bidyikarrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de help, assist\
\\xv Kan-bidyikarrme ngarr-wayhke nanih.\
\\xe Help me lift this up.\
\\xv Karri-bidyikarrmerrimen.\
\\xe Let's help one another.\
\\xv Kabindi-bidyikarrme daluhdaluk bu kabirri-yawmang.\
\\xe They are midwives.\
\
\\lx bid-yil\
\\pr kun-\
\\va bid-yilno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de veins in finger.\
\
\\lx Bidjerok\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Barrbinj clan estate.\
\
\\lx bidjibme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de manipulate quickly with hands/fingers eg. stir, mix (with an implement), fasten a bolt, screw on a lid\
etc.\
\\xv Bidj\uc0\u729 rru ka-bidjibbidjibme karri-nan.\
\\xe We can see a whirlwind spinning around\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bidjirrbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de rub quickly back and forwards between the hands such as in the use of fire sticks.\
\\pdv kk\
\\xv Yi-bidjirrbonghmen yi-wululuhke kun-mimal.\
\\pde Yi-burdebmen yi-wurlhke kun-rak.\
\\pde burdebme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bidjurdu\
\\ps n.\
\\de Whirlwind.\
\\sy nawurlam\
\\uv W= nadjardawo\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Bidjurdu Djang\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name Kumarrirnbang Creek region\
\\de Open area in gorge near Berddolkko. There is a flat rocky area near the sandy creek bed. It is a fv:djang \'91sacred site of religious significance\'92. Increase rituals are not sanctioned at this fv:djang because it is dangerous and it would harm those who performed the ritual. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Bidjurrh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de waterfall and plunge pool on the upper Cadell River, both above and below the falls are sacred places for frog and dog totems\
\\xv Nani Bidjurrh nani kubolkdjamun. Nani kanjdji bolkdjamun.\
\\xe This is Bidjurrh and this is a sacred/restricted place. This part below [the plunge pool] is a sacred/restricted place.\
\\uv E/D\
\\dt 15/Nov/2011\
\
\\lx bih\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge INTERJ.\
\\re interjection used by Kune dialect speakers\
\\de an interjection used by Kune speakers, possibly which originated as a fv:kun-dangwok clan lect marker but through general use has\
now lost this function\
\\xv Yi-kurrmen bih!\
\\xe Put it there!\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bik\
\\va bikbik, bikibiki\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pig\
\\re pig\
\\bw from English 'pig'\
\\de feral pig.\
\\xv Bik ba-bolkbom, ba-bolkdjorlodjorlokwong.\
\\xe Pigs have made holes all over the country.\
\\xv La mako yim-kan ba ngarrbun bik ngarr-bun warde ngan-marnewarrewon.\
\\xe And bring a rifle and so can kill the pigs otherwise they are going to wreck my [country].\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bikbik\
\\pr kun-\
\\va birrkbirrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ribs\
\\re ribs\
\\de ribs\
\\sd body part\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur W, I, E, Djnj= kun-birrkbirrk, birrkbirrkno\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bikkal\
\\ps n.\
\\ge stone.blade\
\\re stone blade with beeswax handle\
\\de stone knife blade which has a handle fashioned from beeswax.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\uv E\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bikku\
\\ps n.\
\\ge goanna.sp.\
\\re spotted tree monitor\
\\re goanna (spotted tree monitor)\
\\de spotted tree monitor\
\\sc Varanus scalaris\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\uv I, Kdj\
\\ur W, Djnj= djerrekko\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bikkurr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge catfish.spp.\
\\re eel-tailed catfish sp.\
\\re fi:Neosilurus_spp.\
\\de eel-tailed Catfishes (black ones only)\
\\sc Neosilurus spp., egs. Neosilurus ater, Neosilurus argenteus, Neosilurus hyrtlii, |fs\{but also\} Cinetodus froggatti, Anodontiglanis\
dahli.\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\ur W= makurl, namardaka, Kdj= binjdjarrang, ganbaldjdja\
\\ee Some speakers say that big black ones are fv:bikkurr and are fi:yirridjdja moiety. The smaller white ones are called fv:marrngunj and are fi:duwa moiety.\
\\xv Kondah djenj ka-rrurndeng, kam-re konda konda kam-re kondah ka-rrurndeng, minj ka-bidbun kurih, fi:only dunbuhman ka-bidbun en ngardderrhwo modjarrkki ka-bidbun kaddum bad konda djenj ka-rrurndeng namarnkol barrhmanj, njarlkan, karlerrh, bikkurr karrurndeng konda kumekke djal bonj ka-rrurndeng. \
\\xe This is where the fish go back- they come up to here and then go back. They can't climb up [the bar of boulders at the waterfall], only\
sooty grunter can, short neck turtles, fresh water crocodiles can climb up to the higher area but here the fish go back: barramundi,\
saratoga, archer fish, long toms, black eel-tailed catfishes, there's nothing they can do, they just go back.\
\\pdn nakeryi\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bikkurrudj\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge plant.name\
\\re fi:Buchanania_arborescens\
\\de purple plum tree which grows close to the water's edge\
\\xv Anbikkurrudj yiman andudjmi, warradjan kangun.\
\\xe The purple plum is similar to the green plum fi:(Buchanania_obovata) and pig-nosed turtles fi:(Carettochelys_insculpta) eat it.\
\\sc Buchanania arborescens\
\\sn 2\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re fi:Terminalia_erythrocarpa\
\\de small tree up to 10m high, grows along freshwater streams and has edible red fruit\
\\sc Terminalia erythrocarpa\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj= an-bikkurrudj\
\\ur I, E, W= man-bikkurrudj\
\\sd plant\
\\p anbikkurrudj02.JPG\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bikmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge rot\
\\re rot, (v.i.), become rotten\
\\de (of fruit) to become rotten, dried out\
\\xv Makkan bonj yi-bawo korroko bikminj.\
\\xe Leave that one [fi:Terminalia_ferdinandiana fruit], it's already become rotten.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Bilamonobbo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re place on bank of lower Liverpool River\
\\sd placename\
\\de plain country along a bend of the east bank of the lower Liverpool River upstream from Manbulu Karri (also known as the Mumeka\
landing). Location from  Lat. -12\'b015'38.28" Long.: 134\'b07'17.34" to around Lat.: -12\'b015'30.74" Long.:134\'b06'58.99"\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bilbilk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fire\
\\re fire (underground in flotsam near watercourses)\
\\de a vigorous fire which burns beneath the matted roots and flotsam of riverbeds, especially in paperbark forests\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd fire\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bilem\
\\ps n.\
\\ge canoe\
\\re canoe (bark)\
\\re bark canoe\
\\de bark canoe made from stitching together a folded piece of fi:Eucalyptus_tetrodonta bark.\
\\xv Djabay\'e9na Ka-warr\'e9ya man-kuken mani manbolh. Bilem ngarri-bidbuni.\
\\xe Here at Djabay\'e9na Ka-warr\'e9ya it is an important place. We used to pull our bark canoes up [out of the river here].\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= wirlam, Kdj= wularl\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx biliken\
\\ps n.\
\\ge billycan\
\\re billycan\
\\de billy can, metal container\
\\pdn mambard\
\\un The fi:kun-kurrng register name fv:mambard, has become another synonym in normal unmarked language as well as its use in fi:kun-kurrng.\
\\xv Bobbidj, bekkang kah-bume wanjh birri-yoy, birri\'96yoy malamalayi kare bene-dolkkang bene-wam 'Ngarre', biliken bene\'96mey mak biliken, biliken, nani biliken wanjh bene-kang rowk, bene-wa:m kure wanjh.\
\\xe He heard a hive making a  humming sound and so they slept and the next day the two of them got up  and went off, 'Let\'92s go', they got\
a billycan here and another there and they took them all and went there.\
\\sy djabbilarna\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Bilindje\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re place on the Mumeka to Maningrida road on the Tomkinson flood plain\
\\de place transected by the Mumeka to Maningrida road on the Tomkinson flood plain\
\\ee Bilindje is visited at the end of the wet season to exploit the large stands of fv:man-djurlukkun fi:'Antidesma_ghaesembila' which\
produce a delicious purple berry.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bilinj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Eucalyptus.sp.\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_sp.\
\\de kind of Eucalypt, possibly a bloodwood\
\\sc linnaean name unknown\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bilke\
\\va biwke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge bend\
\\re bend (v.t.)\
\\de bend (variant form of fv:biwke)\
\\xv Kun-kurra man-bedje ka-bilke.\
\\xe The wind bends the spear grass.\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bilme\
\\va biwme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge bend\
\\re bend (v.i.)\
\\de bend (variant form of fv:biwme)\
\\xv Bonj bilmeng barledanj.\
\\xe It's bent, it's become crooked.\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bilmo\
\\ps adj.\
\\ng Only attested in fv:kanjbilmo 'tough meat'.\
\\ge tough\
\\re tough\
\\de tough\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Bilwoyinj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re place near Mumeka to Maningrida road\
\\de place on Tomkinson River flood plain transected by Mumeka to Maningrida road, near Kumando.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bim\
\\va bimno, kun-bim\
\\ps n.\
\\ge image\
\\re painting\
\\re picture\
\\re image\
\\sn 1\
\\de painting, drawing, image\
\\xv Malayi arri-djalbolkyurrhkeyi Nadjabba, Kurrbbirnbaleng arriyoy. Nadjabba bim na-kuken.\
\\xe The next day we continued past that place to Nadjabba and camed at Kurrbbirnbaleng. At Nadjabba there are important paintings.\
\\sn 2\
\\de cat's cradle string game\
\\cf bimbun\
\\ce to paint or draw\
\\p cats_cradle.JPG\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bimbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge draw\
\\re draw, paint (fi:kun-kurrng register)\
\\de draw, paint a picture, write\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bimbun\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bimbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge draw\
\\re draw\
\\re paint an image\
\\re write\
\\sn 1\
\\de draw, paint or otherwise use markings to create a picture\
\\xv Yi-bengkan Kodjok nawu bimbohbimbom?\
\\xe Do you know that man of Kodjok skin who used to be an artist ('used to paint').\
\\sn 2\
\\de write\
\\xv Yi-ngeybimburren!\
\\xe Write your name!\
\\sy wokbimbun\
\\pdv bimbonghme\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bimdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.image\
\\re painting (be present)\
\\de there is/ are painting(s)\
\\xv Konda ku-rurrk ka-bimdi.\
\\xe There's a painting here inside [this rock shelter].\
\\xv Konda Kurrngawarluk bani-nang karrakbarl ka-bimdi wanjh 'nidjarra Kurrngawarluk'. \
\\xe At Kurrngawarluk they [the Nakorrkko] saw a painting/image of the moon and so they said [in Dalabon] 'that is Kurrngawarluk'.\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bimmak\
\\va na-bimmak, ngal-bimmak etc.\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge artist\
\\re artist (a good one)\
\\re good artist\
\\de skillful artist\
\\sn 2\
\\de beautiful paintings, good art\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bimmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge take.photo\
\\re take photo, record image\
\\de take photo with camera (still or moving film)\
\\xv Wadjbala nawu nga-yime ngabe ngarduk wadjbala nani ka-worhnan Birdakuk ngarduk didjan fi:eneldji ka-ni nani\
nungan kun-wok ka-worhnan nani kemramen kan-bimmang bim ka-manamang Kela\
\\xe These white fellas are my whitefellas, this one here is Peter Cooke who is working at the NLC and this one is a linguist and this one is\
a camera man Kela who is taking pictures of the rock paintings, taking lots of pictures.\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bimname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge do.painting\
\\re painting (do, put)\
\\de do a painting, make a drawing, place an image.\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx bin\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de fruit of dodder laurel\
\\sc fruit of Cassytha filiformis\
\
\\lx binana\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de range of small herbs with brightly coloured flowers.\
\\sc Pimelia punicea, Buchnera sp.\
\
\\lx bindjarran\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.name\
\\re fi:Cryptocarya_cunninghamii\
\\de kind of tree (5-15m) which grows in monsoon vine forest habitats and has a\
poisonous black fruit.\
\\sc Cryptocarya cunninghamii\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur Djnj= ankurddu\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx binihbininj\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1. many people 2. adults\
\
\\lx binik\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.name\
\\re fi:Allosyncarpia_ternata\
\\de anbinik tree, large monsoon forest tree (15-30m) which grows only in the sandstone escarpment country of western Arnhem Land and\
the Alligator Rivers region (although one is said to be growing at Ngolwarr near Kubarledjowoy which may be the most eastern\
example). The Bininj Kunwok name is now often used as the common name in English.\
\\xv Kure anbinik dja binik ka-rrulkdi marrek arri-wurlhkemeninj ba-rungi ba-yawoyhrungi ba-rroweni\
arri-yawoyhwurlhkeyi ba-rey::: kureh ba-rey bad nomo anbinik kun-djurle makka ba-yakkeni.\
\\xe In anbinik forests we didn't light fires because repeated fires would kill the forest, so we would burn off [to the side of the forest to\
make a fire break] and when it died down, we'd light another until it finished the fire break but there was no fire [allowed] in the anbinik\
forest, they are there for shade.\
\\sc Allosyncarpia ternata\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj= an-binik\
\\ur I, W= man-binik\
\\cf mi-binihbinik\
\\ce in a grove of an-binik trees\
\\sd plant\
\\p unnamed anbinik forest.jpg\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bininj\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge man\
\\re man\
\\de Man.\
\\xv Yoy la bene-dolkkang bene-wam bininj la yawk-yawk ngalekke daluk bene-wam.\
\\xe As she (a rainbow serpent) slept those two tried to get up, a man and a young woman.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge person\
\\re person, human\
\\re human\
\\de Person/human being.\
\\xv Mayh namekke nakka bininj ni bininj yerre kah-ni nawu korlordoddok, la rakul, lumbuk, karrkkanj, njalehnjale, nakbu wakwak bininj ni.\
\\xe Those animals were once people, they were people before, the peaceful dove, the Red-eyed, Pigeon, the common bronzewing, the Falcon, the crow and all the others, they used to be people.\
\\xv Ngalkudji ngalkohbanj kuni ngalkangila wanjh ngaleng kangeyyo kurdukadji kaluk ngaleng wanjh bininjni korroko wanjh yerre mayh yimerranj.\
\\xe There was an old lady whose skin name was Ngalkangila and now we call her emu, a long time ago she was really an old lady. [Wildfire Band song text].\
\\sn 3\
\\ge Aboriginal person\
\\re Aboriginal person\
\\de Aboriginal person/people.\
\\xv Kun-red bu balanda, bininj, minj karri-re kumekke.\
\\xe This is a place where Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people shouldn't go.\
\\sn 4\
\\ge male\
\\re male\
\\de male\
\\xv Al-bininjkobeng ka-mang na-buyika bininj alwanjdjuk.\
\\xe The female emu marries another male emu.\
\\cf binihbininj\
\\ce People, adults.\
\\pdn kk= yol\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bininjkobeng\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de husband/wife, spouse.\
\\xv Bi-djalnangahnang na-ngamed nani nuye Warlang, Warlang nuye na-bininjkobeng.\
\\xe He kept watching her, what's her name, Warlang's wife, Warlang was her husband.\
\
\\lx bing\
\\va birng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Kakadu dunnart\
\\sc Sminthopsis bindi\
\\sy kobbiring\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx binghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de make a lateral click with the tongue against the side of the mouth.\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bingkanj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Unidentified plant with tuber.\
\
\\lx bingkurrng\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\pdv kk\
\\de 'cousin' in Aboriginal kin system MMBD, MMBSSD.\
\\pde na-kurrng/ngal-kurrng.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bingok\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term. Eg. My wife or classificatory marriage partner, your fv:ngal-kurrng, you are my\
mother.\
\\cn nga-djongokngarre.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx binjbalak\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge marked.register\
\\re mother-in-law respect register\
\\de lexical replacement affinal kin respect register which is used with one's actual fv:ngal-kurrng (spouse's mother and her sisters) and\
fv:na-kurrng (spouse's mother's brothers)\
\\sy kun-kurrng\
\\sy kun-binjbalak, kun-mikme\
\\sn 2\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ge mother-in-law\
\\re mother-in-law\
\\de mother-in-law\
\\sy ngal-binjkurrng\
\\sy kun-balak, kun-kurrng.\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx binjbinj\
\\ps adj.\
\\re narrow, thin\
\\de narrow, thin, skinny\
\\xv Kebbinjbinj nungkah.\
\\xe He has a long/narrow nose.\
\\xv Benbukkang bininj bu kabirrkurrme mandulkbinjbinj kore kukeb.\
\\xe He showed people how to put thin sticks into the centre of the fire [in order to make it easier to light the fire].\
\\id DK, MG edits.\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx binjdoy\
\\pr na-\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kun-derbi.term\
\\re tri-relational kin term\
\\de term of reference used by a person about their spouse's father and spouse's father's siblings.\
\\cn na-/ngal-binjmuni\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx nabinjkunak\
\\ps n.\
\\re brother-in-law\
\\de Brother-in-law.\
\\xv Ngaye ngamarnemarrkwarreminj nabinjkunak ngardduk.\
\\xe I was worried for my brother-in-law.\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 254\
\\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx binjkurrng\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spouse's.M/MB\
\\re mother-in-law, mother-in-law's brothers\
\\de one's spouse's mother and her siblings\
\\xv Ngaye ngarduk ngal-binjkurrng.\
\\xe My own mother-in-law.\
\\sd kinship\
\\sy -binjbalak\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx binjmuni\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de woman to husband about her parents.\
\\cn na-/ngal-binjdoy.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx birdalbirdal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of acacia good for attracting honey bees\
\\sc Acacia praelongata\
\
\\lx birdarrbirdarr\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp\
\\re fi:Acacia_plectocarpa\
\\de kind of Acacia\
\\ee fi:Acacia_plectocarpa and fi:Acacia_torulosa are very similar and easy to confuse with each other. However, the seed pods of the two\
trees are quite different, fi:Acacia_torulosa having much longer and narrower pods.\
\\sc Acacia plectocarpa\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sy an-murlurdum\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx birddurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge quartz\
\\re quartz\
\\de quartz\
\\de stone tool or point made from quartz\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx birdi\
\\va bidi\
\\ps n.\
\\de beeswax\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx birdiddji\
\\pr na-\\\
\\ps n.\
\\de male, boy\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde na-rangem\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx birdidjirr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de duwa lect name for man-bolobbi\
\\ng see fv:manbolobbi\
\\sc unidentified\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx birdihme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de squash, crush, run over (in truck)\
\\xv Muddikang bi-birdihmeng bi-bom.\
\\xe The truck ran over him and killed him.\
\\xv Ngarri-bidbom kure kun-wardde-rurrk wanjh Wamud djal-woknang wardi\
kan-birdihmeng kun-wardde.\
\\xe We climbed up into the caves and Wamud kept calling out to the old people (ancestors) so that the\
rocks would not collapse and crush us.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx birdubbirdu\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.sp.\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_nervosa\
\\de species of Melaleuca which includes the water tree fv:djidjerok.\
\\ee Water was obtained from one variety of this tree in times of drought by breaking open the side of the tree with an axe.\
\\xv An-birdubbirdu an-dulkbuyika kun-kurlahbuyika kun-kodyak, an-worrbalabala.\
\\xe The fi:Melaleuca_nervosa tree is different, it has different bark with no paperbark and the leaves are very flat.\
\\uv Djnj= an-birdubbirdu, an-kurlkurlh.\
\\ur I, W= man-birdubbirdu\
\\sc fs:possibly Melaleuca dealbata fs:or Melaleuca nervosa\
\\sd plant\
\\p Melaleuca_nervosaTREE.JPG, Melaleuca_nervosaFLOWER.JPG\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx birdiddji\
\\ps n.\
\\de boy, male\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde na-rangem\
\\ng see fv:na-bird\'ccddji\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx birlahbirlang\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re Sterculia quadrifida\
\\de peanut tree\
\\xv An-birlahbirlang mimno ka-ngalanjhbame.\
\\xe The seed pod of the peanut tree are brightly coloured (i.e. orange or red).\
\\sc Sterculia quadrifida\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-karralarlhmanj, an-koko, I= mankongko, E= birlanghbirlangh\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Birlamonobbo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Marrirn clan estate, a small plain on a bend of the Liverpool River\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx birlanghbirlangh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de wild peanut tree\
\\sc Sterculia quadrifica\
\\uv E\
\\uv I = mankongko, Djnj= anbirlahbirlang, Kdj= ankarralarlhmanj, ankoko\
\\dt 31/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx an-birlemanjwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re fi:Bridelia_tomentosa\
\\de Kind of tree; erect to scrambling shrub or small tree usually 2-5 metres but can grow up to 13 m high, branches very slender, often long and whip-like, scrambling, spreading or drooping with glossy black edible fruits.\
\\sc Bridelia tomentosa\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx birlhbirlh\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Gardenia megasperma\
\\ee A synonym for this Gardenia [in Kune] is fv:man-moyi_badjanno or fv:man-moyi_man-badjan in Kuninjku and Kunwinjku.\
\\xe Large green plum.\
\\xv Man-birlhbirlh kurlahno karri-we kanjdji karri-ngun.\
\\xe We throw away the skin and eat the inner part.\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= man-barlbinj\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx birlikan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de carry fire or light, take a torch\
\\xv Karri-birlikan.\
\\xe Let's take torches.\
\\xv Yukkuyukku ka-birlihbirlikan.\
\\xe The firefly carries light.\
\\dt 31/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx birlimang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.get fire, or a torch. 2.Also, a public section of the lorrkkon ceremony.\
\\xv Bu ngarri-birlimang lorrkkon kenh bulanj werrk ka- birlimang, wanjh bangardi yerre,\
wanjh ngarridj, kodjok. Yerre duwa kabirri-birlimang, kela, wamud, balang, kamarrang.\
\\xe When we get fire for the lorrkkon, first all the bulanj subsections get fire, then bangardi, ngarridj, and\
kodjok. After this all the duwa get fire, kela, wamud, balang and kamarrang.\
\\dt 31/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx birlimanjyak\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re Denhamia obscura\
\\de kind of tree (5-10m)\
\\xv An-birlimanjyak me-yak djal kun-dulk.\
\\xe The fv:anbirlimanjyak is just a tree, it doesn't provide any food.\
\\sc Denhamia obscura\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx birlino\
\\pref\
\\va kun-birli\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr birli 'flame'+no '3rd person possessedsuffix'\
\\sn 1\
\\ge flame\
\\re flame\
\\de flame, fire\
\\ng incorporable\
\\xv Dalukorro ka-birlikimukmen, bangkerreng wanjh ka-birliyahwurd kun-kurra, ya ka-kolung, ka-rrowen.\
\\xe In the windy part of the dry season, the flames are whipped up, but in the last of the rainy season, the very early dry time, the fires are\
small because yeah, the wind dies down.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge light\
\\re light (n.)\
\\de light of a fire, an electric light or of lightning\
\\xv Wolbu kam-birlikadjung.\
\\xe The bugs are attracted to the light.\
\\xv Man-djewk ngan-bom ngadberre, ngurdulmeng la birlibirliwern ngarri-nang.\
\\xe The rain fell on us and there was thunder and we saw lots of lightning.\
\\sd fire\
\\bb\
\\uv W, I, E, Djnj, Kdj\
\\dt 31/Mar/2007\
\
\
\\lx birlmanda\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de\
\\de kind of Eucalyptus tree\
\\xv Anbirlmanda Maranboy Bulmurn karri.\
\\xe fi:Eucalyptus_bigalerita is found around Bulman and Maranboy.\
\\sc Eucalyptus bigalerita\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx birlmo\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\va birlmono\
\\ps n.\
\\ge branch\
\\re branch with depression\
\\de branch, typically a paperbark, with a cup shaped depression in it.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx birlmu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de generic term for Silver Barramundi, adult\
\\ee Barramundi fingerlings are called fv:naminjdjibuk\
\\sc Lates calcarifer\
\\uv W= namarnkol, marlarlak\
\\en yirridjdja, Yabburdurrwa\
\\ng see also fv:mankumirli and fv:wardurrkku\
\\ee REM = djirrmar\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx birnbirndok\
\\va bidbirndok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pardalote\
\\re pardalote, black-headed\
\\re fi:Pardalotus_striatus\
\\de Two species of northern pardalotes (striated pardalote and black-headed pardalote); makes a nest in horizontal ground burrow (about 2 ft long) in soft earth or in tree hollows.\
\\sc Pardalotus striatus; Pardalotus striatus melanocephalus\
\\uv E, I\
\\ur Kdj= djornhdjornduk\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx birndalbirndal\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\va birndalbirndal\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Philydrum_lanuginosum\
\\re waterlily type\
\\de Kind of water lily with erect fleshy leaves. Children make whistling noises by blowing into the tubular leaves. This whistling is said to attract snakes.\
\\xv Dedjkorrkdedjkorrk ka-worrbidbidbun birndalbirndal.\
\\xe The Australasian grebe walks across the Philydrum waterlily leaves.\
\\sc Philydrum lanuginosum\
\\uv Djnj, W?\
\\sn 2\
\\ge waterlily.root\
\\re waterlily root (kun-kurrng name)\
\\de name in Kuninjku fv:kun-kurrng register for fv:nganjno 'root of waterlily tubers used to make cakes called man-ko' (in Kuninjku dialect only?)\
\\pdv kun-kurrng register\
\\pde nganjno\
\\uv I\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx birnde\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Acacia species with long needle-like leaves.\
\\sc Acacia praelongata\
\
\\lx birndu\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge mosquito\
\\re mosquito\
\\de Mosquito. There is a fv:djang totemic site for the mosquito near Marrkolidjban.\
\\pdn mernengel\
\\sd insects\
\\sn 2\
\\ge march.fly\
\\re march fly\
\\de March fly.\
\\sd insects\
\\sn 3\
\\ge glossy.ibis\
\\re glossy ibis\
\\de Glossy ibis (which is black and has a beak like a mosquito proboscis thus the polysemy).\
\\sc Plegadis falcinellis\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx birndulme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de strike water with hands to frighten fish so that they move in a certain direction eg. towards a fish trap\
or net or to frighten crocodiles before getting into the water to swim.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx birne\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de Shiny spider\
\\sc Gasteracantha westringi\
\\uv I, E\
\
\\lx birnulk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Chrysopogon latifolius\
\\sc Chrysopogon latifolius\
\
\\lx birng\
\\va bing\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Kakadu dunnart\
\\sc Sminthopsis bindi\
\\sy kobbiring\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx Birba\
\\va Biba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de name of an estate or fv:kun-ngeybadjan regional name in the Imimbar Creek region\
\\xv Kure koyek Malnjangarnek warddeyak ngaleng kondah ngaye, Yayminji ngalengarre Birba ngalengale nakka bonj ka-rri\
nadjinem barrk, ka-rri. \
\\xe To the east there at Malnjangarnak there are no rocks and so they live here in my country [black wallaroos] and at places such as\
Yayminji and the Birba estate, that's where you can black wallaroos fi:(Macropus_bernadus).\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx birbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de kill, strike, shoot, spear\
\\xv Badjorrokorrongko birri-birbonghmeng.\
\\xe They shot a buffalo.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dulubun\
\\ee birbun 'sew'.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx birbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de sew, stitch\
\\xv Kabirri-madj-birbun.\
\\xe They are sewing clothes.\
\
\\lx birhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spank, slap\
\\cf -dedjbirhke\
\\ce spank on the bum\
\\cf -wodjbirhke\
\\ce whack with a stick\
\\xv Ngun-dedjkudjbirhke.\
\\xe He will smack you on the bum with a stick.\
\
\\lx birmo\
\\ps adj.\
\\de formative in fv:kurlahbirmo 'hard skin' (e.g. a fruit).\
\\sy -rayek\
\
\\lx biruk\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re fi:Blepharocarya_depauperata\
\\de medium sized tree (10-13m) which has an irritating sap containing alkalines which cause an allergic reaction upon contact.\
\\xv An-biruk karriyayme bu karrikarrme.\
\\xe The fi:Blepharocarya_depauperata tree causes irritation/itchiness if we touch it.\
\\xv Man-biruk kun-dulk na-warre yi-yaymen.\
\\xe The fi:Blepharocarya_depauperata tree is a bad tree that will make you itch.\
\\xv 'mibiruk mibiruk kawolhborrombi' [morrdjdjanjno song text] ... Djibowkmanj mibiruk ka-ni anbu kun-wardde yi-bengkan an-biruk. 'Kawolhborrombi' kune ka-yime kun-bonjdjek kabi-woyime. Ka-ni ku-wardde kun-bonjdjek, mibiruk kuwarddedubbe.\
\\xe 'mibiruk mibiruk kawolhborrombi' [the text of a fv:morrdjdjanjno song]... The black wallaroo Djibowkmanj [mythological name] sits in the rock, you know, near the fi:Blepharocarya_depauperata trees. The song word 'ka-wolhborrombi' means that the kangaroo is cold and is taking shelter. She sits in the rock to escape the cold, in the grove of fi:Blepharocarya_depauperata trees, deep in the crevices of rock.\
\\sc Blepharocarya depauperata\
\\cf mibiruk\
\\ce in a grove of fi:Blepharocarya_depauperata trees\
\\uv Djnj= an-biruk\
\\ur I, W, E = man-biruk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx birrang\
\\ps n.\
\\de machete\
\\bw from Makassarese berang 'machete', cf Malay parang 'machete'.\
\
\\lx birrbbirr\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge shrub.sp.\
\\re fi:Verticordia_cunninghamii\
\\de kind of shrub (1.5-5m) with pointed narrow leaves growing in clusters along stems\
with flowers which provide nectar for honey bees\
\\xv An-birrbbirr ka-rrahkendong an-kung.\
\\xe The fv:anbirrbbirr tree fills up the honey hives (with nectar collected by bees).\
\\xv Anbirrbbirr anwarre, kunwurr kanwon. Kurorrbo ka-di. Yiman\
anbarndarr la worrbuyika, ankobuyika.\
\\xe The fi:Verticordia_cunninghamii shrub has no food parts. It causes diarrhoea. It grows on alluvial flats/open woodland. It is similar to turkey bush but has different leaves and flowers.\
\\sc Verticordia cunninghamii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sn 2\
\\ge shrub.sp.\
\\re misidentification of fi:Calytrix_achaeta and fi:Acacia_platycarpa\
\\de small woody white-flowering fi:Calytrix shrub of sandstone habitats, however, this is possibly a common misidentification. Likewise\
fi:Acacia_platycarpa is sometimes referred to also as fi:an-birrbbirr.\
\\sc Calytrix achaeta\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur\
\\sn 3\
\\ge shrub.spp.\
\\re generic name for various densely flowering small trees\
\\de in Kuninjku the name fv:man-birrbbirr seems to be used for a number of densely flowering shrubs and small trees including\
fi:Verticordia_cunninghamii, yellow flowering fi:Austromyrtus species and also fi:Acacia_platycarpa which also has dense white\
inflorescences\
\\ee In Kundedjnjenghmi, the name is more exclusively used for fi:Verticordia_cunninghamii where on the Arnhem Land plateau there is\
greater botanical biodiversity and thus plant names are used with more discernment than in Kuninjku country on the eastern margins of\
the plateau which is dominated more by open savanna forest.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx birrem\
\\ps n.\
\\ps n.\
\\ge goanna sp.\
\\re black-spotted ridge-tailed monitor\
\\de Black-spotted ridge-tailed monitor. Inhabits rock country, stony hills and residual rocky outliers, growing to about 60cm and is reddish-brown with scattered dark brown and black spots mixed with lighter cream coloured flecks on the torso. The tail (darker in colour than the torso) has a double row of enlarged, keeled scales (Cogger 2000:361).\
\\xv Bulurr bodmedarrkdarrk.\
\\xe fv:Bulurr has a back like a wood rasp.\
\\uv E, I, Kdj\
\\ur Djnj, Kdj, W= bulurr\
\\sy nabadbirrem\
\\sc Varanus baritji\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\sd 20/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx birrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge clear.up\
\\re clear up (clouds)\
\\de (of weather, clouds) clearing of clouds after rain or a storm.\
\\xv Konda ka-djakdung, la kuni korroko birrhmeng.\
\\xe It's raining here but over there the clouds have already cleared.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge rake.clean\
\\re rake up, clear the ground\
\\de clear the ground of vegetation, make a clear space to sit down or camp\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, W\
\\ur I= werrhme\
\
\\lx birri-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\de 1. 3rd person plural past tense (3 augmented PAST) intransitive pronominal prefix. Note: non-past\
form is kabirri-.\
\\xv Birri-wam djenj.\
\\xe They've gone fishing (3 or more people).\
\\de 2. 3rd person plural past tense subject, 3rd person singular object (3 augmented/3 minimal PAST).\
\\xv Birri-kinjeng.\
\\xe They burnt it.\
\\de 3. Non-verbal characteristic prefix.\
\\xv Mimih birri-kom-kuyeng.\
\\xe The mimih have long necks.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx birribirl\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de crawl inside a hole\
\\xv Wanjh birri-kadjuy man-dubang ngimeng, birribirl, birri-korlkmeng, birri-rdehmeng\
manih, birri-rdehmeng manih, birri-rdehmeng bonj.\
\\xe They chased him and he crawled inside an iron wood tree so they started to chop it down, they\
chopped it and chopped it\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Birrirddak\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\uc0\u8232 \\de Riverine savanna area to the east of where the Nabarlek road crosses Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek and leading southeast to the valley entrance. A creek flows through the area, surrounded by sandstone outliers. It has significance as an Aboriginal walking route (fv:Bininj_manbolh) as well as being a camping and fishing area. The topographic map place name of \'91Birraduk Creek\'92 is derived from Birrirddak.\
\\xv \'85en Kabo Kaworrkdjubmirri, kah-re ngamed kore Djimerre ya. Kuredkuken arri-yongoyoy. Ngalengman kanjdji ka-djale. Koreh bukka man-berrk manekke ka-berrkyirriyo makka Birrirddak, konda ka-karri, ka-wukkarri nanu Birrirddak.\
\\xe \'85and Kabo Kaworrkdjubmirri which goes on to Djimerre, yeah. We camped in these important camping places. Downstream the sites continue. But in the open savanna area, where all the savanna forest is located, that\'92s Birrirddak, to the west (of the previously mentioned sites). Birrirddak is to the west (of Kabo Kaworrkdjubmirri and Djimerre).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx birriyalang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of paperbark tree found on plain country. The same tree in riverine environments is called fv:anmurlmu\
\\sc Melaleuca leucadendra (plain country habitat only)\
\\sy baridjbarr\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx birrkala\
\\ps n.\
\\re boomerangs\
\\de Sacred boomerangs used in pairs as musical instruments in various ceremonial contexts. They are not used for hunting in western Arnhem Land.  \
\\xv \'85kore kubolkbuyika makka manbu birrkala birriyiwarlbuni mayh birribuni yiman kunj. Dja bolkkime birrkala kabirridjalkan kore ceremony.\
\\xe \'85in other parts of the country people used boomerangs for hunting birds or kangaroos. But now people [in Arnhem Land] just take them to ceremony. \
\\so Andrew Manakgu, Injalak Arts painting documentation\
\\sy barlkkan\
\\id DK\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx birrkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place finger/hand into OBJ.\
\\xv Bu njale yi-bidbirrkan yi-delkke.\
\\xe Whatever you put your hand into and (then) you splatter it [with the paint].\
\\xv Ka-kebbirrkarren.\
\\xe He's sticking his finger up his nose.\
\\xv Kabi-dedjbirrkan!\
\\xe He's poking his finger up her bottom!\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx birrkarn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Triglochin.tuber\
\\re fi:Triglochin_dubia\
\\re tuber, edible\
\\de kind of edible small yam/tuber\
\\sc Triglochin dubia\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sy an-kukbam\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx birrkbirrkmurrngno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de rib bone\
\
\\lx birrkbirrkno\
\\va kun-birrkbirrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de ribs\
\
\\lx birrkul\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bloodwood.sp.\
\\re fi:Corymbia_confertiflora\
\\de kind of eucalypt bloodwood tree\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_confertiflora \
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx biwke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de bend OBJ\
\\xv Yi-ngimiwemen, yi-biwke wanjh yi-rayekwo.\
\\xe Put it [wire] through the hole, bend it, and then tighten it.\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx biwme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de bend in shape\
\\xv Yi-wernhkarrme wardi ka-biwme.\
\\xe Hold on to it tightly or else it might bend.\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx biwo\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\de wild honey, found in antbed and old logs at ground level.\
\
\\lx biwudj\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge pygmy.goose\
\\re green pygmy-goose\
\\re fi:Nettapus_pulchellus\
\\de Green pygmy-goose\
\\sc Nettapus pulchellus\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= diwidj\
\\sn 2\
\\ge pinkeared.duck\
\\re pink-eared duck\
\\re fi:Melacorhynchus_membranaceus\
\\de Some speakers also refer to the pink-eared duck as fv:biwudj.\
\\sc Melacorhynchus membranaceus\
\\sd bird\
23/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx biyarrng\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.spp.\
\\re fi:Cochlospermum_gregorii, fi:Cochlospermum_gillivraei\
\\de two species of Cochlospermum that grow in the flat stone habitats of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv An-biyarrng ku-wardde, ku-djamburdda ka-rri.\
\\xe The fi:Cochlospermum_spp. trees grow on expanses of flat rock in the stone\
country.\
\\sc Cochlospermum gregorii, Cochlospermum gillivraei\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx biyawo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de feral cat\
\\sc Felis catus\
\
\\lx biyika\
\\va buyika\
\\ps adj.\
\\de 1. other one, another\
\\xv Nani na-warre, na-biyika yi-mang.\
\\xe This one's no good, get another one.\
\\de 2. different kinds\
\\xv Mak nakka nungan na-buyhbuyika ngarrih-ngeybun kunj nungan nakka na-buyika.\
\\xe But of course, all different things we call different names , kangaroos for example they're different.\
\\xv birri-buyika\
\\xe that other 'mob'.\
\\pdn kk= -waribbu\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx biyonbiyon\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of plant\
\\sc Mitrasacme spp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx blengked\
\\ps n.\
\\de blangket\
\\pde from English 'blanket'\
\\pdn kk= kun-kun.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx -bo-\
\\ng incorporable\
\\de water\
\\sy -kolh-\
\\xv yi-bo-rrahkendo\
\\xe fill the container with water\
\\xv man-bo-kimuk\
\\xe a large body of water\
\\xv man-bo-winjku\
\\xe fresh water\
\\xv ka-bo-yo\
\\xe water lies there\
\\xv man-bo-mak\
\\xe good drinking water\
\\dint I= -bo-, E= -kolh-\
\
\\lx bob\
\\sy djirrkkinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge little.woodswallow\
\\re little woodswallow\
\\re fi:Artamus_minor\
\\de little wood swallow\
\\sc Artamus minor\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 2\
\\ge white-breasted.wood.swallow\
\\re fi:Artamus_leucorhynchus\
\\de white-breasted wood swallow\
\\sc Artamus leucorhynchus\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 3\
\\ge delicate mouse\
\\re delicate mouse\
\\re fi:Pseudomys_delicatulus\
\\de Delicate mouse.\
\\sc Pseudomys delicatulus\
\\sd mammal\
\\sn 4\
\\ge grassland.melomys\
\\re grassland melomys\
\\de Grassland melomys.\
\\ee Names for small rodents are often confused. Some speakers are lax in naming conventions with these animals, and will use a single name to refer to a number of different species. Note the polysemy/metonymy for woodswallow and grassland melomys. It is not clear what the semantic grounds are for this metonymy.\
\\sc Melomys burtoni\
\\sd mammal\
\\lf polysemy\
\\uv E\
\\ur I, W, Djnj= djirrkkinj\
\\dt 01/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx bo-bang\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de undrinkable water, brackish or foul smelling water.\
\
\\lx Bobarddedde\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx bobbidj\
\\agr man-\
\\ge honey\
\\re honey variety\
\\re fi:Austroplebeia_magna\
\\de kind of wild honey or 'sugar bag' which is found in tree hollows and has a crumbling cerumen or brown resinous wax which is not favoured for tool and artifact production. The honey of this bee is much relished. The base of the hive, called fv:ngeyhno is made from a harder cerumen which can be used for material culture production although other honey type hives are preferred.\
\\sy karderre\
\\sc fi:Austroplebeia_magna\
\\uv I, W, Djnj\
\\uv E, Rembarrnga= yurduh\
\\pdn kk= namawul\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bo-bebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de water appears/comes out\
\\xv Bonj la wanjh kun-ronj merreh-merrinj bobehbobebmeng wanjh bi-wayhkeng nanih nanih\
na-djalyahwurdurd bi-wayhkeng\
\\xe And then water kept coming out and he lifted him, the smallest one, he lifted him up.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bobekke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Cook, burn.\
\\pdv kk\
\\xv Molarrinj ka-bobekke.\
\\pde Kunj ka-kinje.\
\\xe She's cooking the kangaroo.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bobekme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.burn (o.l.= rung), 2.cook (o.l.= djorlengmen).\
\\xv Ka-bobekme ka-djarrdelme.\
\\pde Ka-rung ka-rri.\
\\xe It's very hot (just cooked).\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bo-bele\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de spring water, clear water.\
\
\\lx boberlwern\
\\pr an-/man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de plain country with numerous braided streams\
\\xv Makkalarl, Maburrinj, Djalbangurrk, Kumalabukka an-boberlwern.\
\\xe Makkalarl, Maburrinj, Djalbangurrk, Kumalabukka is plain country with numerous braided streams.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bo-bidbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.tide come in 2. water rise up (eg.flood, start of wet season).\
\
\\lx bobo\
\\ps interj.\
\\de good-bye\
\
\\lx bobokurrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lay down OBJ flat\
\
\\lx boboyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lie on stomach head up\
\\xv Yi-yun! Yi-boboyo ngarr-yolyolme.\
\\xe Lie there (don't sleep)! Lie on your stomach and let's tell stories.\
\
\\lx bod\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fly\
\\re fly (insect)\
\\de Fly (insect).\
\\xv Mandudjmi ka-rung wanjh bod ka-wernmen.\
\\xe When the green plums are ripe, it is the time when there are many flies.\
\\pdn kk= muk\
\\sd insects\
\
\\lx Bod\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate. Literally 'fly (insect)'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Bod Karri\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place name, a fly dreaming site or fv:djang on the road between Maningrida to Ramingining.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx bodbang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge green.ant\
\\re green ant\
\\de green ant\
\\lit bod+bang = fly+dangerous\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W= kabo\
\\ee green ant is a totem for one of the matrilineal semi-moieties fv:yarri-wurrkarr\
\\sc Oecophylla smaragdina\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bodbod\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de 1.brown goshawk\
\\sc Accipiter fasciatus\
\\de 2. red goshawk\
\\sc Erythrotriorchis radiatus\
\\de 3. swamp harrier\
\\sc Circus approximans\
\\uv I\
\\ur Djnj= wiwol\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx boddan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lift head up to peer\
\\xv Kunj ka-boddan.\
\\xe The kangaroo is lifting its head and looking.\
\\xv Kabene-worrhme kabene-ni, ka-wakewake ka-boddan ka-worhnaworhnan kabene-ni.\
\\xe They both light a fire and sit, one of them crawls along, lifts his head up to peer and is on the lookout,\
they both sit there (these are the words to a song in the fv:wurrurrumi style ).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx boddi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lie face down\
\\xv Yi-kurrmen dolobbo ka-boddi.\
\\xe Put the bark painting face down.\
\
\\lx boddowk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Spangled Grunter, Jewel Perch\
\\uv W= burd, bokorn\
\\sc Leiopotherapon unicolor\
\\ee A very large specimen of this fish is called fv:burrulhmi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bodme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de make footstep sounds on the ground (of animals and people).\
\
\\lx bodme\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de back\
\\pdn kk= kun-dolke.\
\
\\lx bodmedadjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de double over in laughter or in pain.\
\\xv Ngarri-djekmeng ngarri-djekmeng ngarri-bodme-dadjmeng.\
\\xe We laughed and laughed until we were doubled over.\
\
\\lx bodmekukrayekwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de raise a child to adulthood\
\\xv Ngaleng na-Kalarrdju bi-bornang, na-Wurrik duninj bi-bodmekukrayekwong.\
\\xe A Kalarrdju clansman was her real father but a Wurrik clansman actually raised her.\
\
\\lx bodmemarrumarru\
\\ps n.\
\\re sitting doing the same thing repetitively\
\\re continually engaged in a task\
\\de Person who in sitting is continually engaged in a particular action or task.\
\\xv Nga-bodmemarrumarru dolobbo nga-bimbun.\
\\xe I've been continually doing bark paintings all the time.\
\
\\lx bodmemurrngno\
\\va kun-bodmemurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de back bone\
\
\\lx bodmeno\
\\va kun-bodme\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de back\
\\pdn kk= kun-dolke.\
\
\\lx bodmengalanjno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de turtle shell, crustacean shell\
\
\\lx bodmewarremen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd body part\
\\de develop a sore back\
\\pdn kk= -dolke-ngayirrihme\
\
\\lx bodmeyukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd body part\
\\de depression in the back caused by a medical condition.\
\
\\lx bodno\
\\ps n. insect\
\\de honey bees\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bo-dume\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de where a river meanders to create a wide outer bank.\
\
\\lx bodjdjamiri\
\\pr an-\
\\va bodjdjamiri\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_sublanata\
\\de kind of erect Acacia shrub 1-2m\
\\ee There are two forms of this plant; one an erect form and the other a prostrate form. The prostrate form is called fv:an-mininj.\
\\sc Acacia sublanata (erect form only)\
\\sy an-minem\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-dubirrahdubirrah\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_linarioides\
\\de kind of erect Acacia shrub 1-2m\
\\sc fi:Acacia_linarioides\
\\sd plant\
\\p anbodjdjamiri:Acacia (in Djnj plants 2)\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Bodjimdjimyi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Area on the upper East Alligator River downstream from Djurleburrk, in the approximate vicinity of 60-70km southeast (upstream) from Cahill's Crossing. The site name literally means 'water-Pandanus aquaticus-having'.\
\\xv Bodjimdjimyi kare kaddum kure Djurleburrk, kaddum Namondowaran, koyek that creek... Kunred karrkad tharran.  \
\\xe From Bodjimdjimyi it goes upstream to Djurleburrk, and upstream on a tributary to the east is Namondowaran... which is up on top of the plateau.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 4/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx bodjinhjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de squirt water\
\
\\lx Bodjiyilku\
\\va Bodjiyilk\'9c\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Birba region (upper Cadell River)\
\\uv E\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bodjohme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de fondle faces together, kiss passionately\
\\cf bodjobodjohme (reduplicated form).\
\
\\lx bodjub\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spinifex.sp.\
\\re spinifex sp.\
\\de kind of spinifex species found only on sandstone plateau and rock country\
\\xv Anbodjub kuwarddebuldjdjarn karri darnki njilhmi yiman kayime Kumarrirnbang.\
\\xe The fv:anbodjub is found in the middle of the rock country close to springs such as at Kumarrirnbang.\
\\ee The English/scientific name of this rock country spinifex is presently unknown.\
\\sd plant\
\\so Mary Kolkkiwarra\
\\sy an-karrarndjalhkarrarndjalh\
\\sc to date unknown\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bohbobowk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de 1. Melon hole country, landscape with water-catching depressions. 2.wallow hole created by buffalo or\
feral pigs.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bohmi\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Parsonsia_velutina\
\\de kind of vine which grows into the canopy of trees in jungle-thickets or drier sandstone thickets\
\\sc Parsonsia velutina\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Tylophora sp.?\
\\re Tylophora benthamii?\
\\de Kind of vine.\
\\sc Tylophora benthamii?\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bokala\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de the strong current of water in a flood\
\\uv E\
\\ee Burarra fv:bugala 'water'.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx bokarrang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge milky.way\
\\re milky way\
\\de Milky Way. Has totemic significance in most major sacred cult ceremonies.\
\\sd mythology\
\
\\lx bokenh\
\\ps adj.\
\\de two\
\\xv Burlarldjdja bokenh kun-yed Yayminji and Lorlo.\
\\xe Two places in Burlarldjdja clan country, Yayminji and Lorlo.\
\\xv Ngune-bokenh.\
\\xe You two.\
\\pdn kk= burlalh\
\\sy djarrkno\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bokinje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de boil water\
\\pdn kk= djurlkkinj-bobekke\
\
\\lx bokkadji\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-kole\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bokkadjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de follow tracks\
\\xv Bi-bok-kadjuyi.\
\\xe He followed his tracks.\
\
\\lx bokkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de follow tracks\
\\xv Ngudda yi-bokka, namekke kure yi-wam ngun-bom ngurrewoneng wanjh kumekke\
yi-bok-mang, yi-bok-mang, yi-bok-kan kure yi-nan ka-re.\
\\xe Follow the tracks, those where he attacked you two, get his tracks and follow them to where you'll see\
him going along.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bokkarddji\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-kole.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bokko\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear type with many barbs running along the shaft\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =bardangarr\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bokmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de find tracks\
\\xv Ngudda yi-bokka, namekke kure yi-wam ngun-bom ngurrewoneng wanjh kumekke\
yi-bok-mang, yi-bok-mang, yi-bok-kan kure yi-nan ka-re.\
\\xe Follow the tracks, those where he attacked you two, get his tracks and follow them to where you'll see\
him going along.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Bokmarnde\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge prop.n.\
\\re clan name\
\\de Clan name associated with the Jawoyn language and the upper Mann River region.\
\\xv Djal Mann River. Nawu Dinjhmi Bokmarnde, anekke Mann River.\
\\xe Still Mann River, the Dinjhmi and Bokmarnde clans, on the Mann River.\
\\xv Konda ngadman ka-rrokmen Djordborrhborrken Kabornayenan Bornawurlu Baningukberlhberlbuni nawu ngalengman na-Dinjhmi na-Bokmarnde kunwadda.\
\\xe We\'92ll go first to the places Djordborrhborrken, Kabornayehyenan, Bornawulu, and Baningukberlhberlbuni which are places belonging to the Dinjhmi and Bokmarnde clans.\
\\sd clan name\
\\dt 10/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx bokno\
\\va kun-bok\
\\ps n\
\\de track, footprint (animal, human, vehicle).\
\\xv ka-bok-yo\
\\xe There's a track there.\
\
\\lx bokngarru\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de dancing belt which has feathered tassles and traditionally made from human hair.\
\\xv Bokngarru kabirri-djongburren kun-borrk kenh.\
\\xe They dress in dancing belts for dances.\
\
\\lx bokkodj-bokkodj\
\\va bokodj-bokodj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dove\
\\re dove species, bar-shouldered dove\
\\re bar-shouldered dove\
\\de Bar-shouldered dove.\
\\sc Geophelia humeralis\
\\uv E, Djdj, I\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 10/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx bokorn\
\\hm 1\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spangled.grunter\
\\re spangled grunter\
\\re Leiopotherapon unicolor\
\\de Spangled grunter. These fish form schools and migrate to breed in the early wet season or after the first storms of fv:kunumeleng. \
\\ee Spangled grunter are common in rocky creeks and were caught by spearing them with pronged fishing spears. Because spangled grunter are small fish and they are often found in shallow rocky watercourses, a special technique for spearing them was to lower the spear into the water and wait for a large one to approach the end of the spear. The fish was then speared with a jabbing motion. This avoided the spear being thrown in from above the water and hitting the rock below which damaged the prongs requiring much time and effort to repair them.\
\\uv W\
\\uv I= boddowk\
\\sc Leiopotherapon unicolor\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bokorn\
\\hm 2\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Syzygium.eucalyptoides\
\\re fi:Syzygium_eucalyptoides_ssp._bleeseri\
\\de Small tree (5-10m) with edible white 'apple' available fv:kunumeleng through to fv:kudjewk. The ripe fruits are considered a seasonal indicator for fv:kunumeleng time. The polysemy with the name for the spangled grunter is based on the role of these fruits as a metonymic sign, that is, their fruiting is associated with the appearance of schools of spangled grunters which are plentiful at this time of year as they migrate to breed.\
\\sc Syzygium eucalyptoides ssp. bleeseri\
\\uv I\
\\ur E, W= man-djalbbirdo, Djnj, Kdj= an-djalbbirdo\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bokung\
\\ps n.\
\\ge black.bittern\
\\re black bittern\
\\re fi:Ixobrychus_flavicollis\
\\de Black bittern.\
\\sc Ixobrychus flavicollis\
\\uv I, W, Kdj\
\\ur Djnj= Kodjok Bamdjelk\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx bok-yawan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de look for tracks\
\
\\lx bok-yo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de track (lies)\
\\xv Na-korrkko kabene-bok-yo kure Manmoyi.\
\\xe There are footprints of the fv:Na-korrkko ancestor heroes at Manmoyi (Yirridjdja Manmoyi 'number 1'\
near Mankorlod).\
\\pdn kk= -badjorr-morndi.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bolbbolbbinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of grass used as a red-brown dye in basket making\
\\xv Windilk kaworrbalabala bolbbolbbinj worrdjokko.\
\\xe The fi:Haemodorum_coccineum plant has flat leaves, the fv:bolbbolbbinj plant has narrow/fine leaves.\
\\sy durda\
\\sc Haemodorum brevicaule\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf0 \\lx bolbme\
\\va borlbme\
\\ps v.i./v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\re get used to\
\\de Get used to something or someone.\
\\ng Takes possessive pronoun if the object is human.\
\\xv Ngarri-bolbmeng di.\
\\xe We've got used to drinking tea.\
\\xv Ngudda yi-bolbmeng ngarduk.\
\\xe You've got used to me.\
\\sn 2\
\\re learn\
\\de Learn, become familiar with something eg. language, a skill.\
\\xv Kandi-bukkan ba nga-bolbme.\
\\xv You show me so I will learn it.\
\\id MG, AM\
\\dt 21/Sept/2016
\fs32 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\\lx bolh\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps n.\
\\de on the path/road\
\\xv Ku-bolh dingihdi.\
\\xe It stood ther on the road.\
\
\\lx bolh\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de path, track, road.\
\
\\lx bolhbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de create a path or road.\
\\xv Na-ngale bolhbom?\
\\xe Who made this track?\
\
\\lx boliblib\
\\va borliblib\
\\ps n.\
\\ge magpie-lark\
\\re Australian Magpie Lark\
\\re fi:Grallina_cyanoleuca\
\\re Magpie lark, peewee\
\\re peewee\
\\de Australian Magpie-lark\
\\sc Grallina cyanoleuca\
\\uv I, W, Kdj\
\\sy W= wordword\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx bolidj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re cicatrice\
\\re raised scar\
\\de Cicatrice, often cause by intentional scarification to leave a design or series of cuts on various parts of the body (upper arms, chest, breasts, buttocks).\
\\se kun-bidbolidj\
\\de Lines on palm of hand.\
\\sd human body\
\
\\lx bolidjno\
\\ps n.\
\\re raised marks on tree trunks\
\\de Spirals on trunk of fi:Pandanus_spiralis or other raised marks on tree trunks.\
\\sd plant\
\
\\lx bolk\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps loc.\
\\de at a location\
\\xv "Ku-bolkyirridjdja ngurrurdu kaluk wam. Burlarldjdja bokenh kun-yed Yayminji and\
Lorlo. En njamed Karlbarrad kun-yed. Ku-bolkburlarldjdjakenh, ku-djalbolkdanjbik\
kumekke kun-yed.\
\\xe Then Emu went to yirridjdja country. Burlarldjdja clan estate has two places, Yayminji and Lorlo. And what's its name, the place Karlbarrad. Burlarldjdja country has three places.\
\\cf bolk-buyika.\
\\ce another place.\
\\xv "Ladjkurrungu la yi-re, konda ngal-yabokwarre ngane-yo." "Oh, kumekke nuk ku-bolkbuyika ngah-yo."\
\\xe "Ladjkurrungu you go, I'm sleeping here with your sister." "Oh, I'll go and sleep somewhere else then."\
\\xv Djarre ka-bolk.\
\\xe "Long way country".\
\\xv Ku-bolkmakmak.\
\\xe Pleasant country; a good place.\
\\xv Ku-bolkwarre.\
\\xe Bad country.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bolk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de place, country\
\\xv Kun-bolkkurulk.\
\\xe Place belonging to the Kurulk clan.\
\\cf bolkdjorlok\
\\ce Country with holes.\
\\pdn kk= kun-melworn.\
\
\\lx bolkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Follow after something.\
\\xv Duruk ka-bolkan nudno ka-yawan, ka-kanjnome.\
\\xe The dog is following the rotten smell, looking for the stinking meat.\
\\xv Kabarri-bolkan an-karre an-mak.\
\\xe They [should] follow the rules.\
\
\\lx bolkbaladj\
\\pr gu-, gun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge open.place\
\\re open place\
\\re clearing\
\\de Place with little vegetation, clear or open place. Clearing.\
\\xv Ku-bolkbaladj, Ku-rralkyak, dja ba-rralkruy.\
\\xe It's a clear place, with no grass, but (only because) the grass had been burned off.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkbalay\
\\ps n.\
\\re plain country\
\\de plain country which extends over a very large area.\
\\sy kabbal\
\\sd geographic\
\
\\lx bolkbarradbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge dig.trench\
\\re dig trench or drain\
\\de Dig a trench or drain.\
\\xv Kabani-bolkbarradbun, kabani-bolkkarung, kulba ka-mankan.\
\\xe (The two clever men) dig a trench, and dig a hole, and the blood runs down into it.\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkbele\
\\ps n.\
\\de clear place, place with clear, fresh running water.\
\\uv W= bolkbaladj.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bolkborledme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de change direction\
\\xv Bolk-borledmeng kun-kurra.\
\\xe The wind changed direction.\
\
\\lx bolkborndokdi\
\\ps v.I.\
\\de (have) place of birth\
\\xv Nungka Birrkaladju ka-bolkborndokdi.\
\\xe His birth place is Birrkaladju.\
\
\\lx bolkbuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dry.place\
\\re dry place\
\\de Dry place, (place) be dry.\
\\xv Konhda Nanguluwurr barri-yoy Na-Djawonj, ka-bolkbuk.\
\\xe Jawoyn people slept here at Nanguluwurr, it's a dry place.\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge do.earthworks\
\\re do earthworks\
\\de Conduct earthworks, dig tunnels or mine, create environmental damage, destroy a place.\
\\xv Ka-rohrok, bu ka-yime kinga ka-bolkbun.\
\\xe (The saltwater and freshwater crocodiles are) alike, in that they both build (tunnels).\
\\xv Bu kabirri-bolkbun kun-red ka-rrowen, kun-red bu karri-bolkdowen namekke story nuye ngadberre ngad, nawu kumekke tribe namekke tribe nawu Mirarr namekke.\
\\xe If they damage the place, the country there will die, the country and us with it and the story will die, that is the tribe called the Mirarr people.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge make noise, disturb the peace, interfere with a place\
\\re disturb a place\
\\re make a racket, make a noisy disturbance\
\\de Make a racket, make a noisy disturbance.\
\\xv Wurdwurd kabarri-bolkbun.\
\\xe The children are making a lot of noise.\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkbuyika\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps n.loc.\
\\ge elsewhere\
\\re elsewhere\
\\de Somewhere else; elsewhere.\
\\xv Ngudda yi-djawayhmen nawu nguddangke ngunmarnewohnan bu ngudda yi-djare yi-re ku-bolkbuyika dja yi-bengdayhkemen bu ngudda yi-re yiman funeral, ceremony dja mak bu yih-dowen.\
\\xe You must ask if it\'92s OK from your boss if you want to go to some other place, and let them know if you are going away on funeral, ceremony or if you are sick.\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkdadjerren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de border area, where one location ends and another starts.\
\\xv Marrek ngalyod birri-kurrmeninj ya ku-wardde marrek ka-bimyo wardi birri-bimbuyi\
wanjh ben-nguyi, wardi ka-yo Kubumi and Kabarrebarre and Dilebang and Milmilngkan\
and Kabolkdadjerren.\
\\xe They didn't put rainbow serpents when they painted on the rock otherwise the snake might have\
consumed them because there were rainbow serpents located at Kubumi, Kabarrebarre, Dilebang,\
Milmilngkan and up to where that area finishes.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bolkdowen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge place.be.boring\
\\re place be boring\
\\de Place become boring with nothing of interest happening\
\\xv Bolkdoweng konda.\
\\xe This place is boring.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge place.die\
\\re place die\
\\de Destruction of a place (and people)\
\\xv Bu kabirri-bolkbun kun-red ka-rrowen, kun-red bu karri-bolkdowen namekke story nuye ngadberre ngad, nawu kumekke tribe namekke tribe nawu Mirarr namekke.\
\\xe If they damage the place, the country there will die, the country and us with it and the story will die, that is the tribe called the Mirarr people.\
\
\\lx bolkdulum\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge elevation\
\\re high ground\
\\re elevated area\
\\de High ground, ridges upstream, in hilly country.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkdjalkmang\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de small rift or gorge in stone escarpment country.\
\
\\lx Bolkdjamo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place with billabong in fv:Djok clan estate. Includes the rock art sites at fv:Kunumidjarda.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bolkdjamo\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de 'cousin', son-in-law/father-in-law (refernt and vocative).\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde na-kurrng\
\\xv Na-bolkdjamo kan-weybu kun-djule ba nga-mimalawme.\
\\xe 'Cousin', give me some tobacco so I'll have a smoke.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bolkdjamun\
\\ps n.\
\\de sacred place, restricted place\
\\an bolk-djarlang\
\
\\lx bolkdjarlang\
\\ps n.\
\\de unrestricted place, a place which has no special sacred features.\
\
\\lx bolkdjedme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de excavate and produce a cutting through the earth.\
\
\\lx bolkdjorlok-won\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de create holes on the ground (usually marks left by rain)\
\
\\lx bolkkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge control.place\
\\re control a place\
\\re be in charge of a place\
\\de Be responsible for a place, be in control of a place.\
\\xv Wanjh kaluk nawu arri-danginj bedmanwali kabarri-bolkkan... Badbu arri-danginj, ngalu. \
\\xe Some time later it will be the turn for my siblings to be responsible for the country... those sisters of mine, especially her [the one you know].\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkkarung\
\\mr bolk 'place' + karung 'dig'\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge dig\
\\re dig ground\
\\de Dig (ground), mine.\
\\xv Yiman ngad bininj wardi karri-bengwarre bu kabirrim-re kabirri-bolkkarung dja bu yiman kun-rorrekenh mak manu kukkukenh ngarrengarre.  \
\\xe So we Aboriginal people could become concerned/worried if they come and mine because of the associated environmental and water [management] issues.\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkkawadjwern\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps n.\
\\de sandy place.\
\
\\lx bolkkanalanj\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sandy.place\
\\re sandy place\
\\de Sandy place.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bolkki\
\\va bolkkime\
\\ps t.adv.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge now\
\\re now\
\\de Now.\
\\xv Nawu kakkak kayime nungka kabolknahnan, bu bolkki minj nangale karri. \
\\xv Someone who calls the country their mother's mother's land will be able to look after/be responsible for that land, if there is no one left now (no more members of the land owning clan).\
\\sn 2\
\\ge today\
\\re today\
\\de Today\
\\xv Nga-re Marrkolidjban, bolkki ngam-durndeng.\
\\xe I'm going to Marrkolidjban and coming back today.\
\\pdn kk= kolhkol\
\
\\lx bolkkime\
\\va more usually fv:bolkki\
\\ps temp. adv.\
\\de today, now.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bolkmaddeng\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stay at home, refuse to come when called.\
\\xv A:Baleh kabirri-ni? B: Nga-ben-kayhmeng korroko, bonj birri-bolk-maddi.\
\\xe A:Where are they? B: I've already called them but they staying where they are.\
\
\\lx bolkmelme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de set foot.\
\\xv Wanjh bolk-melmeng, bolk-melmeng, "Ah kamak rowk. Ma, karri-re man-kole\
kandi-marne-ma.\
\\xe He tried setting his foot down, "Ah, it's OK now, get my spear and let's go."\
\
\\lx bolkmodmiken\
\\ps n.\
\\de peaceful place\
\
\\lx bolknahnan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge look.out.for\
\\re look out for\
\\de be on the watch for, look out for. \
\\sn 2\
\\ge care.for.place\
\\re care for a place, look after a place\
\\de Care for country, look after a place, caretake a place.\
\\xv Wanjh bu ngaye nga-rrowen, ngaleng wanjh ka-bolknahnan o na-rangem nawu birri-wern na-rahrangem. \
\\xe When I die, my daughters will be in charge of my country along with their many brothers.\
\
\\lx bolkname\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge leave.camp\
\\re leave camp as is\
\\de Leave a campsite without packing up so as to indicate to people who might visit that the residents intend to return.\
\
\\lx bolknan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de look at a place, survey surroundings\
\\xv Kondanjh kandi-marne-korrkke warde ngurri-korrkke ngurri-nan ba nga-bolk-nan ba\
kamak nga-re wanjh nga-re nga-yame.\
\\xe Look here and try and lance my sore so I can get up and go look at that place and spear it (a kangaroo).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bolknome\
\\ps v.t./i.\
\\de smell the ground, sniff for the scent of tracks.\
\\xv Ngarri-keb-kan duruk, ka-bolk-nome wanjh.\
\\xe We go hunting with dogs and they sniff the ground for the scent.\
\
\\lx bolkngeybadjan\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps n.\
\\de place of significance, a large area or locality within which there are a number of smaller named\
locations each described as fv:ka-bolkngeyyahwurd.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bolkngeykimuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge regional.name\
\\re regional place name\
\\re estate place name\
\\de Regional place name; estate name\
\
\\lx bolkngeyyahwurd\
\\pr ka-/ku-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge small.name\
\\re small placename\
\\de Placename that designates a small locality as opposed to fv:kun-bolkngeykimuk 'large named region'.\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Bolkngok\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Estate name in the upper Liverpool River region, 'lightning or fv:Namarrkon country'.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx bolkrokahrokan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de earthquake\
\
\\lx bolkwarlah\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de large open space.\
\
\\lx bolkwarre\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de unpleasant or ugly place, 'rubbish place'.\
\
\\lx bolkwarrewohwon\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de disturb a place, make a lot of noise and muck around.\
\\xv Bik na-warre ka-bolk-warrewohwon.\
\\xe Pigs are no good, they ruin the place.\
\
\\lx bolkwidjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de point at a place\
\
\\lx bolkwurdyahwurdyahwurd\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de small place names, small locations within larger regions or fv:kun-bolkbadjan.\
\\sy kun-redwurdyahwurdyahwurd\
\
\\lx bolkyakmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de bad incident occur eg. a death or accident\
\
\\lx Bolmo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of (at least) three fi:duwa moiety patriclans- one on the central Arnhem Land plateau, one a Jawoyn speaking clan to the south\
and another on the upper East Alligator River\
\\xv Mamamh ngan-marnemurrngkang ngal-yikbolmo nani Rarrkal ngane-yaw weleng yakminj kumekke kuwardde\
ngarri-murrngkurrmeng. Namekke ku-kurlk.\
\\xe My mother's father's sister of the Bolmo clan put those [kangaroo] bones there, Rarrkal and I were her grandchildren but she died and\
so we put all these bones in the rock there. Those there on the ground.\
\\xv Kondanj wanjh Kayerrngwe wanjh Bolmo.\
\\xe Here the place is called Kayerrngwe and then it is Bolmo clan land [neighbouring].\
\\ee The Bolmo clan fv:kundangwok interjection (Marlkawo lineage) is fv:ngabbarna or fv:barna\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bolobbi\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de tuber that has a yellow flower and grows in plain country. Cooked in ashes under ground.\
\\sc unidentified\
\\sy man-bolobbi=yirridjdja birdidjirr=duwa\
\\nt CHECK\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bolobme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de flow very fast (eg.flood waters), water with a strong current.\
\
\\lx bolomhbolomhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re walk with large feet flopping down\
\\de Walk with long feet that flop down e.g. of certain birds or when walking with diving flippers.\
\\xv Ankarrekuyengkuyeng ka-bolomhbolomhme kure andem.\
\\xe The Jesus lily trotter bird flops its long feet down on the lily leaves.\
\\dt 19/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx bolung\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de rainbow serpent of Kune and Dangbon mythology\
\\uv E, D\
\\sy ngalyod\
\
\\lx bolurlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swelling of floodwaters, the rising of water courses during the wet season.\
\
\\lx Bomarranj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\uc0\u8232 \\de Line of escarpment on the north-west side of the Kabbari complex, around 15km southwest of Mamardawerre on the west side of the Goomadeer River. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx bome\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de water flow\
\\xv Man-kabo ka-bome.\
\\xe The creek is flowing.\
\
\\lx bomimihke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge liquid.extrude.by.cooking\
\\re cause liquid to appear by cooking something\
\\de cause liquid or fat to come out of meat by cooking it.\
\\sy njiwnjiwhke\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bonbon\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cormorant\
\\re little black cormorant\
\\re fi:Phalacrocorax_sulcirostris\
\\de Little black cormorant.\
\\sc Phalacrocorax sulcirostris\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bonh\
\\ps part.\
\\re then, now\
\\de A particle used only by Kune speakers which can mean either \'91then\'92 or \'91now\'92. It usually follows either the verb or an oblique pronoun postposed after the verb but can also occur at the start of a sentence where it can introduce a new topic or sequenced event. It is partly equivalent to fv:wanjh 'then'in other Bininj Kunwok dialects, although wanjh has many more functions than bonh. When combining with a verb in the past perfective it means roughly 'already'; with a non-past verb used as a suggestion, it means 'now\'92.\
\\xv Duruk ngun-baye-ng ngudberre bonh.\
\\xe The dog has already bitten you.\
\\xv Yi-re bonh.\
\\xe You go now.\
\\xv Nga-re bonh nga-yawan ngalbadjan ngarduk.\
\\xe I\'92m going now to look for my mother.\
\\xv Bonh, ngalbadjan kikkik rerrkang kure ngalangarre dabuno.\
\\xe A mother bird sat on her egg.\
\\xv Weleng bonh, namekke wurdyaw kikkik nang nabadjan wayarra.\
\\xe Then that baby bird saw a big monster.\
\\dt 11/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx bonome\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re sniff liquid\
\\de Sniff a liquid, especially petrol.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\xv Nanih nawu wurdwurd might be kabirridjordmen minj kabirrire kabirribongun kunbang, o petrol kabirribonome o kundalk kabirriwunghme, larrk. \
\\xe So when those kids grow up they probably won't drink alcohol, or sniff petrol or smoke grass, no.\
\\so Quoted in Etherington, Steve, \'91Learning to be Kunwinjku: Kunwinjku people discuss their pedagogy\'92, PhD Thesis, Charles Darwin University, 2006 \
\\id DK\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\\lx bongbong\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de pink bush apple\
\\sc Syzygium eucalyptoides ssp. eucalyptoides formerly Eugenia eucalyptoides.\
\\ee The fruit of this tree is smaller than fv:bokorn and is usually pinkish when ripe but can also be white.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bongbow\
\\pr an-\
\\va an-bowngbow\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re Syzygium eucalyptoides ssp. eucalyptoides\
\\de kind of small tree (3-5m) with wet season pinkish fruit\
\\sc Syzygium eucalyptoides ssp. eucalyptoides\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-bongbong\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bongdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.live with trouble and tribulation\
\\xv Korroko dabborrabbolk birrih-bongdi, kun-warre birrih-karrmeng.\
\\xe A long time ago our ancestors lived difficult lives and they had bad problems.\
\\uv E\
\\de 2. Bound up with string.\
\\uv W\
\
\\lx bongh\
\\ps formative in many fv:kun-kurrng words usually corresponding to fv:bun in ordinary language.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bonghme\
\\ps formative\
\\de appears in many fv:kun-kurrng verbs.\
\
\\lx bonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de kill, hit.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde -bun\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bonghmerren\
\\ps reflex.v.\
\\de fight one another\
\\pde burren.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bongka\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Varanus.sp.\
\\re long-tailed rock monitor\
\\re black-palmed monitor\
\\re fi:Varanus_glebopalma\
\\de Long-tailed rock monitor, also known as the black-palmed monitor.\
\\sc Varanus glebopalma\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\ur Kdj= balakarde\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bongka\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Acacia.platycarpa\
\\re fi:Acacia_platycarpa\
\\de kind of wattle tree or shrub, 3-7m high with cream to yellowish globular flowers\
\\sc Acacia platycarpa\
\\sy man-borrelk\
\\uv E\
\\ur I = karlbbo, man-borrelk\
\\ee There is frequent misidentification and confusion between fi:Acacia_platycarpa and fi:Acacia_mimula because of the similarity in the flowers, fruit and habitat. Brock (2001) describes the main differences in the size (especially width) of the leaves, time of flowering and the texture of the bark. fi:Acacia_platycarpa is described as having 'bark: rough and grey to brown on trunk, smooth and whitish on upper branches' and 'phyllodes: alternate, smooth to slightly coarse, stiff, broad, curved, upper margin strongly curved and often wavy, blade 11-16cm x 3-6cm, dull grey-green, 3-4 prominent raised longitudinal veins joining towards base, rounded tip.' (Brock 2001:71). fi:Acacia_mimula on the other hand is described as 'bark:rough, grey, fibrous to tessellated' and 'pyllodes: smooth, elongated, curved to sickle-shaped, widest at middle, blade 8-15 cm x 1-3cm, dull green with 2-3 prominent longitudinal veins. fi:Acacia_platycarpa flowers from November to July whilst fi:Acacia_mimula only from April to June (Brock 2001:68).\
\\sn 2\
\\de acacia shrub with fine needle-like leaves and small globular yellow flowers\
\\sc Acacia alleniana\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= an-bongka\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bongka\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_latescens\
\\de kind of acacia tree\
\\xv An-bongka barrk ka-ngun mimno bu ka-bamobarrbarrhme.\
\\xe The black wallaroo eats the seeds of fi:Acacia_latescens when the seed pods crack open.\
\\sy an-murrukurl\
\\sc Acacia latescens\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur ?\
\\sd plant\
\\p Acacia latescens.2rock, Acacia latescens.2Jabiru.jpg\
\\dt 28/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx bongko\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de fern-leaved grevillea\
\\sc Grevillea pteridiflora\
\\uv E\
\\uv I=mandadjek, Djnj= andadjek, anbarnko\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bongolinjbongolinj\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge song_genre\
\\re song and dance genre\
\\de Rembarrnga and Kune dance and song sub-genre of the fv:kun-borrk genre.\
fv:Bongolinjbongolinj is said to be similar to the style of dancing which mimih\
spirits perform. There are usually two clapstick players and a didjeridu accompanist\
for fv:Bongolinjbongolinj songs.\
\\ee A classic recording of fv:Bongolinjbongolinj can be heard on: Laiwanga, D., Blanasi,\
D., & Plummer, D. (1976). Bamyili corroboree: Songs of Djoli Laiwanga [LP\
record]. Toowoomba: Grevillea Records GRV-1030.\
\\bw\
\\sd music\
\\dt 11/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bongorrkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de ripple the water as a fish swims close to the surface.\
\
\\lx bongun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de drink\
\\xv Birri-mey kun-bang bedberre wanjh birri-djal-bonguneng.\
\\xe They got their grog and just kept drinking.\
\\pdn kk= -djurlkkinjyakwan\
\
\\lx bonj\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 1.finishing marker .finish\
\\xv Bonj yakminj.\
\\xe Finished, all gone!\
\\de 2.the end (used at the end of a story or narrative)\
\\de 3.(Used to delineate or limit.)\
\\xv Kabene-ngey-boken, bonj ka-ngey boken.\
\\xe They've got two names, just two names.\
\\xv Ngarr-bawo la bonj, bonj manekke ngarr-nguneng.\
\\xe Let's leave it, this is enough, let's just eat this one.\
\\xv 'Only' yirridjdja ka-re ka-nan ka-yime mani bonj.\
\\xe Only yirridjdja can go and look there. That's it.\
\\xv A:Yi-djare marne-kan? B:Bonj, ka-mak, nga-kan.\
\\xe A:Do you want me to take it for you? B:No, it's OK, I'll take it.\
\\de 4.(After waiting for a process to finish.)\
\\xv Wanjh duhkeng, duhkang. Bonj bohborrolkang.\
\\xe He lanced it and lanced it (an infected wound) and then the fluid bursted out.\
\\de 5.(Used to describe the size or shape of something)\
\\xv Djalmey kun-dulk yiman bonj kunekke ka-yime.\
\\xe He just went and got a stick which was about 'there' (demonstrates size), this big !\
\
\\lx bonj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de before\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde korroko\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bonjdjek\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\re cold\
\\ge cold\
\\de cold, cold weather\
\\xv Kun-bonjdjek nga-rrowen.\
\\xe I'm feeling the cold.\
\\pdn kun-kurrbele\
\\cf Karri-kukbonjdjekbidbidbun\
\\ce We get goose bumps (when we're cold).\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bonjdjek\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge cold\
\\re cold\
\\de cold\
\\xv Nga-bidbonjdjek.\
\\xe My fingers are cold.\
\\pdn kurrbele\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bonjdjel\
\\ps interj\
\\ge interj.\
\\re clan specific interjection\
\\de Clan specific interjection or fv:kun-dangwok for the Buyhmi clan of the Jawoyn language group. Note that these words can be used as referential terms to refer to a particular clan.\
\\xv Ngarri-yoy konda kun-kare dabborrabbolk kun-red, bonjdjel kun-wok, bonjdjel Buyhmi.\
\\xe We camped here [in this rock shelter] a long time ago, with the people who use the clan word fv:bonjdjel, the fv:bonjdjel Buyhmi clan people.\
\\sd kundangwok\
\\dt 16/Oct/2018\
\
\\lx bord\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de fly\
\
\\lx bordengkekorrongko\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de water peanut,tuber bush tucker\
\\sc Aponogeton elongatus.\
\\pde man-kodjbang\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bordohbordoh\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge clan.lect.interj.\
\\re clan lect interjection for Bordoh patriclan\
\\re kun-dangwok for Bordoh clan\
\\de clan lect interjection or fv:kun-dangwok for the Naborlhborlh lineage of the Bordoh clan\
\\xv Bordohbordoh karri-re.\
\\xe Let's go!\
\\sd kun-dangwok\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx bordokorr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Stringybark\
\\sc Eucalyptus tetrodonta\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\uv I= man-burludak\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bordokorr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de stringybark\
\\sc Eucalyptus tetrodonta\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sy anburluddak\
\\uv I= man-burluddak\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bordomo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de ritual performed to increase honey. A fire is lit at the base of a flowering tree such as a large Eucalyptus and a dance and song is performed. Performers wear a large paperbark headdress.\
\\xv Aa yerre yungkih bordomo arrih-didi kunak arri-worrhmi an kono. ........ arrih-kadjurreni\
bordomo ngarri-marnbuni ankung, ankung arri-kodjmarnbuni an-barlanjdjarr, an-mardba an-djuy, barri-kodjmarnbuni 'more' [yi]man balwowmi an-kung. Mane arri-ngundjikkani bordomo arrih-didi. Arrih-didi munguyh arri-kadjurreni bu arri-yawoyhyakwoni kunak ba-yakmeni yawoyhno arri-kadjurreni ankung bordomo.\
\\xe And then after that we would have that bordomo fire ritual. .......we used to follow each other around making fv:bordomo and if we\
were sulky, it would make us happy..... and in the dry season those trees would flower, the woollybutt and fi:Eucalyptus_phoenicea and\
fv:an-djuy [sp?] and those bees would be happy and it would make more honey with lots of bees humming/buzzing around. And we'd\
follow each other around for fv:bordomo and when the fire had finished we'd follow each other around again for this honey increase\
ceremony.\
\\dt 26/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bordordbokme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spin or plait string from fibre\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde borolhme.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx borl\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de red ochre\
\\sy yamidj\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx borlborl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge termite\
\\re termite\
\\de termite\
\\xv Borlborl ka-rrulkngun, kurrambalk ka-warrewon.\
\\xe Termites eat wood and destroy houses.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx borledke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de turn over to other side, change\
\\xv Birri-kodjkurlu-borledkeng.\
\\xe They changed their minds.\
\\pdn kk= dordedjke\
\\cf see fv:kodj-borledke\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx borledme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.turn around, rotate\
\\xv Borled-borledmeng kumekke ka-yime borled-borledmeng namekke ben-yibkeng wanjh.\
\\xe Around and around she went, around and around until she submerged them.\
\\xv Djenj beneh-yawam bene-yawam wanjh bene-ngalkeng, beneh-nang beneh-nang,\
kah-borledme, borledmeng borledmeng, kuk-borledmeng\
\\xe Looking for fish, they searched until they found one. They found one and watched as it swam around\
and around, turning itself around.\
\\de 2.change\
\\cf dedj-borledme\
\\ce reverse (vehicle) to turn around\
\\pdn kk= dordedjme\
\\cf kuk-borledke\
\\ce change form by sorcery.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx borledmiken\
\\ps loc. adv.\
\\de on the other side, behind\
\\xv Warde borledmiken yi-yawan\
\\xe Try searching on the other side.\
\
\\lx borledmingun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de surround OBJ\
\\xv Mambard ngarri-kurrme rowk wanjh ka-yawoyh-bebme None na-buyika\
kan-borledmingun ka-mulewan an-kung.\
\\xe We fill up the container (with honey) and then another None honey spirit (in the form of a hornet) surrounds us and tells us that there is honey somewhere.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Borliblib\
\\va Boliblib\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate. White clay is found here.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx borlokko\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\agr ngal-\
\\de water python and possibly also the feshwater keelback\
\\sc Bothrochilus fuscus fs:(previously_known_as Liasis fuscus), Amphiesma mairii\
\\ee Yellow and dark brown, fv:kuronj_kare 'it lives in the water' and can change colour.\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx borlorl\
\\ps n.\
\\de post or beam used in house or shade shelter construction\
\\dt 28/May/2006\
\
\\lx Borlorlodulh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Born\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fv:duwa moiety patriclan in the lower Liverpool River region\
\\xv Nani Born wanjh yoh na-Born, mani ku-bolkngamed...Mirwi.\
\\xe This [place] belongs to the Born clan, and this here is for whatsit, the Mirwi clan.\
\\xv Na-Bangardi na-ngalayngu nakka kah-di Namokardabu na-Born.\
\\xe Na-bangardi the one who is our mother's brother [you being my brother] and who lives at Namokardabu, the man of the Born clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx bornan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de father a child\
\\xv Ngaleng bulanj bi-bornang.\
\\xe Bulanj is the father of that girl.\
\\xv Na-ngale ngun-bornang?\
\\xe Who is your father?\
\\xv Beywurd bornarrinj.\
\\xe He fathered (for himself) a child.\
\\pdn kk= walebonghme.\
\
\\lx bornayindan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Belong to one\'92s father\'92s country and clan. When using this term, reference to one\'92s clan can be cited with the fv:kun- prefix which in other contexts is used to refer to the clan of one\'92s mother.\
\\xv Yibornayindan kore kunmokurrkurr kunmok.\
\\xe Your father\'92s country where you come from is the Mok clan.\
\\xv Ngabornayindan walem djarre.\
\\xe My father\'92s country is a long way to the south.\
\\dt 14/May/2016\
\
\\lx Bornawulu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place name on upper Mann River; Mardayin ceremony site also known as 'the pregnant water' because the river swells to a round waterhole shape here.\
\\xv Karri-re banbanibukkan Bornawulu an-bokimuk Mardayin barri-djurlenami korroko dabborrabbolk. Ngarri-rey Nawirddili na-Dinjhmikenh kun-wadda na-Bokmarnde. \
\\xe We\'92ll go and show those two the big water at Bornawulu and the Mardayin site where the old people used to put up a ceremonial shade house. We used to go there, old Don Nawirddili and I, to Dinjhmi and Bokmarnde country.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 10/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx bornde\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Ficus.sp.\
\\re fi:Ficus_virens\
\\re banyan fig tree\
\\de banyan fig tree\
\\xv Bani-bolkngeynami, Namalk, Nabarng bani-yimeng, delek bani-nang. Bani-yimeng name kodjbang bani-nang,\
bani-ngeymangi. An-bornde bani-nang makka bani-ngeymangi. \
\\xe They [the Nakorrkko] gave that place its name 'Namalk' and at Nabarng they saw white clay. They named the water peanut 'kodjbang'\
(fi:Aponogeton_elongatus) and remembered the name. They saw the banyan fig and called its name an-bornde.\
\\sc Ficus virens\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx borndidjborndidjmiken\
\\ps adj.\
\\de mottled, marked with contrasting patches of colour.\
\\xv Werleyh ka-borndidjborndidjmiken ka-kuk-barme.\
\\xe The Red-shouldered Parrot's body gleams with contrasting patches of colour.\
\
\\lx borndok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear thrower, woomera\
\\xv Bolk-melmeng man-kole mey korlhmibom borndok kamak rowk.\
\\xe He placed his foot down, got his spear and tested it with his spear thrower; everything was fine.\
\\pdn kk= karndubbu\
\\sy mangal (CHECK)\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx borndok kebno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear thrower nose or hook which fits into the end of a spear.\
\
\\lx borndokdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge birth.place.male\
\\re birth place of a man/boy (v.i.)\
\\de Be the place where a man/boy was born, literally 'spear-thrower stands' which is based on the custom of placing into the ground a digging stick to mark the birth place for a boy and a digging stick for a girl.\
\\xv Ngaye Kukkurlumurr bolk-Wurrbbarnbulu nga-kodjngalmeng, kumekke nga-borndokdi.\
\\xe I [Bardayal Nadjamerrek] was born at Kukkulumurr in the Wurrbbarnbulu clan estate, that's where my birth place is.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\lx borndung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re wipe, rub\
\\de wipe, rub\
\\xv Balmey kunworr kurlba borndungi.\
\\xe Then he got some leaves and was wiping off the blood with them.\
\\so Maralngurra, Dolly, \'91Reader 34\'92, Oenpelli Literature Production Centre, 1981\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\xv Kano manburrba ngaborndurren.\
\\xe Give me the cloth, I'll wipe myself.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\id DK, MG\
\\dt 3/Sep/2016\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\\lx Bornidjurrih\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Borninjalnjal\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Borninjngulkwern\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kunburray estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Borngdjam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in fv:Nabarng estate, some non-Aboriginal people call this place "Blue Hill".\
\\uv D, E, Djnj\
\
\\lx bore\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de flow (water courses).\
\
\\lx borkbork\
\\ps n.\
\\ge phascogale\
\\re brush-tailed phascogale\
\\de Brush-tailed phascogale. Also a character in a mythological story about this nocturnal animal which in the story drops rocks on humans. Belongs to Rembarrnga and Kune speaking traditions.\
\\uv E\
\\dt 29/Sept/2010\
\
\\lx borolhme\
\\ps v.t\
\\de spin or plait string (hair or string/rope).\
\\pdn kk= bordordbokme.\
\
\\lx borom\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wasp\
\\re wasp\
\\de paper wasp\
\\xv Nabodmebarnko nakka ngalengarre barlmurrng djang, borom nawu dadbe na-bang, kan-baye,... barlmurrng, dadbe nawu karrih-yime.\
\\xe At Nabodmebarnko there is a wasp dreaming place. That wasp is analogous to a king brown snake, that wasp, also called fi:borom, it bites us and is dangerous. That's what we say.\
\\sy barlmurrng\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I = djakbarlh, E= burrmule\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx borrbborrbme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de the dripping of fluids as meat cooks or burns\
\\xv Birri-kinjeng doweng wanjh nudno warrhmeng, borrbborrbmeng yimeng.\
\\xe They burnt him, he died and his body dripped down (as it burnt).\
\\dv nudno ka-warrhme\
\
\\lx borrelk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Acacia.platycarpa\
\\re fi:Acacia_platycarpa\
\\de kind of wattle tree or shrub, 3-7m high with cream to yellowish globular flowers\
\\sc Acacia platycarpa\
\\sy karlbbo \
\\ee There is frequent misidentification and confusion between fi:Acacia_platycarpa and fi:Acacia_mimula because of the similarity in the flowers, fruit and habitat. Brock (2001) describes the main differences in the size (especially width) of the leaves, time of flowering and the texture of the bark. fi:Acacia_platycarpa is described as having 'bark: rough and grey to brown on trunk, smooth and whitish on upper branches' and 'phyllodes: alternate, smooth to slightly coarse, stiff, broad, curved, upper margin strongly curved and often wavy, blade 11-16cm x 3-6cm, dull grey-green, 3-4 prominent raised longitudinal veins joining towards base, rounded tip.' (Brock 2001:71). fi:Acacia_mimula on the other hand is described as 'bark:rough, grey, fibrous to tessellated' and 'pyllodes: smooth, elongated, curved to sickle-shaped, widest at middle, blade 8-15 cm x 1-3cm, dull green with 2-3 prominent longitudinal veins. fi:Acacia_platycarpa flowers from November to July whilst fi:Acacia_mimula only from April to June (Brock 2001:68). Acacia names are highly variable across Bininj Kunwok dialects also. fv:an-borrelk in Kundjeyhmi is not fi:Acacia_platycarpa but fi:Acacia_dimidiata though some speakers of Kuninjku will also ascribe this name (fv:man-borrelk) to fi:Acacia_dimidiata.\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= man-bongka, Djnj= an-barrel, an-barrelk, Kdj= an-barrkkala\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_dimidiata\
\\de kind of Acacia tree\
\\sc Acacia dimidiata\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\dt 18/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx Borreyborrey\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A rocky ridge in the Maburrinj estate east of the Gumardir River. The ridge juts out north from the southern escarpment, surrounded by savanna. The creek below this ridge flows down to Kambukkakarung. \
\\xv Kaddum-kah mankabo kawarddeyirriyo Borreyborrey. Manberrk kabolkmakmak.\uc0\u8232 \\xe Upstream the rocky ridge at Borreyborrey runs parallel to the creek. The open bush here is a good place (i.e. easy to traverse).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx borridjbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dream\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bukirribun.\
\\ee Burarra fi:borrich 'dream'.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx borrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de dance, dance style.\
\
\\lx borrkbun\
\\ps v.t\
\\de play with, pat or stroke\
\\xv Wurdurd yun ngurri-borrkbun wardi ngun-baye.\
\\xe Kids, don't play with it, it might bite you.\
\
\\lx borrkke\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dance\
\\xv Djarrkno kabirri-borrkke, mimih la bongolinjbongolinj.\
\\xe They're dancing two (styles), mimih style and bongolinjbongolinj style.\
\\pdn kk= borrkidjbonghme\
\
\\lx borrkkidjbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dance\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde borrkke\
\\sy dirridjalbelme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx borrkkirri\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de jump around playfully\
\\xv Duruk yaw kabirri-borrkkirri.\
\\xe The puppies are jumping around playfully.\
\\dv Ka-borrkke ka-rrirri. (MKdj)\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\lx borrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\re snore\
\\de Snore.\
\\xv Munguyh kadjalborrme minj bale ngayime ngayo.\
\\xe He just keeps snoring and I can\'92t go to sleep.\
\\uv W, I, Djnj, Kdj\
\\sn 2\
\\re flapping noise (make)\
\\de Make flapping noise of bird wings beating during flight.\
\\uv E\
\\id DK\
\\dt 3/Sep/2016\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\\lx borrobborro\
\\va borrobborroh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Chestnut-quilled Rock-Pigeon\
\\sc Petrophassa rufipennis\
\\uv Kune\
\\uv I =doddorok\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Borrordmi\uc0\u8232 \\ps place n.\
\\re place name in the Tin Camp Creek region\
\\de Scattered boulders/outcrops on a high plain in the headwaters of Tin Camp Creek, about 30km southwest of Mamardawerre.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx borrolkayhwe\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de splash water up into the air\
\\xv Bo-rrolkayhweng\
\\xe He splashed the water up into the air (a motorbike driving quickly through a puddle of water).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bo-rrong\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de action of hitting the water in a particular manner which is said to frighten away salt-water crocodiles.\
This is done when entering water before swimming.\
\\xv Bene-wulebmeng wanjh bene-borroy ngal-dahdaluk, 'djiluh, djiluh, djiluh', kuronj ka.\
\\xe Two women went swimming and they splashed to frighten crocodiles, splash,splash,splash, in the water.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx borrorddo\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\de last born sibling\
\\xv Ngalekke kamanj ngal-borrorddo.\
\\xe That Kamanj is the last born of those siblings.\
\
\\lx borrorrokan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de move ahead quickly, travel by foot through the bush with speed.\
\\dv Karri-dokorrokme.\
\
\\lx bowe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pour out, throw or bale out water\
\\pdn kk= djurlkkinj-warlhke.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Bowidu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate north-west of Mumeka\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx bowidju\
\\va bowidjuwidju\
\\lc kabowidjuwidju\
\\sd geographic\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge flood swirl\
\\de swirling of water, welling up as in a strong current or flood waters.\
\\re swirling of floodwater\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bowinjku\
\\lc manbowinjku\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de fresh water\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bowkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.rise up, bump (as in truck travel) 2. lift and drop somebody onto the ground\
\\xv Kabi-bowkme.\
\\xe He drops him down (onto the ground, 'bump')\
\
\\lx Bowolmang\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps place n.\
\\mr\
\\sn 1\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re place in Bolmo clan estate\
\\de place in Bolmo clan estate where a particular kind of eponymous dark red ochre is found\
\\de\
\\de\
\\sn 2\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ochre\
\\de kind of dark red ochre found at a site in the Bolmo clan estate from which the ochre takes its name\
\\ng\
\\xv\
\\xe\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd material_culture\
\\so Lofty Bardayal Nadjamerrek\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx boyahwurd\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de small water course, spring or billabong, a little bit of water.\
\\pdn kk= djurlkkinj-manjakku.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx boyalkkarrngkarrngh\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp\
\\ge plant name (unidentified)\
\\de kind of plant [as yet unidentified]\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx boyambalhyo\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge water.spread\
\\re water flow wide\
\\de Large wide expanse of water or billabong on a water course.\
\\xv Kaboyirriyo kure Djabidj Bakoluy, kaboyambalhyo. \
\\xe The long straight stretch of river at Djabidj Bakoluy is where the river widens into a large billabong.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 24/Oct/2012\
\
\\lx boyberre\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de a small white apple tree\
\\sc Syzygium forte sp.\
\\uv W, Kdj, Djnj\
\\uv I, E= kidjdjahdjanj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx boyberre\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\de kind of large tree (to 30m) found along banks of freshwater streams and with an\
edible fruit which appears in the wet season\
\\sc Syzygium forte (|fs\{and also possibly\} Syzygium minutuliflorum)\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, I, E (Kune Nakerlk)\
\\ur E (Kune Narayek)= madjabuli\
\\sy I, E (Kune Nakerlk)= kiddjahdjanj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Boyberredjamdulubom\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate. Literally fv:man-boyberre 'Place of fi:Sysygium_forte' fv:dulubom 'speared'\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx boyen\
\\ps temp. adv.\
\\ge recently\
\\re recently\
\\re before (recently)\
\\de Recently, in the recent past, some time ago but with the sense of a more specific point in time and not a time in the very distant past.\
\\xv Boyen 2003 Balanda barri-durrkmirri 168 barri-gukbele dja 28 barri-gukbulerri barri-durrkmirri. Dja fi:contractor nawu gabarri-mre wagehwagen gabarri-durrkmirri 135, nawu gabandi-bidyigarrme ERA.\
\\xe Recently in 2003, there were 168 non-Aboriginal people working and 28 Aboriginal people working (for the mining company). And (as for) contractors who stay here temporarily, well there were 135 of them working for ERA (Energy Resources of Australia).\
\\xv Na-kudji nani Maburrinj birri-djangberhberhkeng. Boyen karri-wam.\
\\xe The only place they did species increase rituals [for emus] was at Maburrinj. We went there [and did that] recently.\
\\se boyehboyen\
\\ge recent.times\
\\re recent times\
\\de In recent times, over the last few months/years with the sense of a recent length of time extended over a continuous period.\
\\xv Dja yiman boyehboyen barriweigang Commonwealth Government barri-weigang gure CDEP $1,200,000 ba gabarridurrkmirri.\
\\xe Over the past period of time, the Commonwealth Government has [in total] handed over $1,200,000 for the CDEP program for workers' [wages].\
\
\\lx boyla\
\\ps n.\
\\de boil (infection)\
\\bw from English 'boil'.\
\
\\lx bo-yo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de water lies\
\\xv A:Ka-bo-yo kumekke? B:Bonj, bukminj.\
\\xe A:Is there water there? B:No, it's all dried up.\
\\pdn kk= djurlkkinj-morndi.\
\
\\lx boywek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge knob.tailed.gecko\
\\re knob-tailed gecko\
\\re fi:Nephurus_sheai\
\\re fi:Nephurus_asper\
\\de Northern knob-tailed gecko, prickly knob-tailed gecko.\
\\ee The mythological fv:boywek is said to 'sodomise' its victims. There are rock paintings of fv:boywek at a site near a place called fv:Marrngunj.\
\\xv Boywek, namekke boywek namarnde ka-re ku-wardde and kan-balhngun!\
\\xe The knob-tailed gecko, that gecko goes around in the rocks as a spirit being and sodomises us!\
\\sc Nephrurus sheai, Nephurus asper\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bu\
\\ps subord. conj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge when\
\\re when\
\\de when\
\\xv Bu nga-yahwurd-ni.\
\\xe When I was a child.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge about\
\\re about, concerning, in relation to\
\\de About, concerning, in relation to.\
\\xv Nga-yolyolme bu na-marrkon djang.\
\\xe I'll tell a story about lightning dreaming.\
\\xv Bu ngudda.\
\\xe That's up to you.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge if\
\\re if\
\\de If (conditional sense).\
\\xv Bu yi-nan kelebuk yuwn yi-bun.\
\\xe If you see a tame animal, don't kill it.\
\\dt 18/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bu\
\\pr ngal-, man- ('na-' prefix form is 'nawu')\
\\ps rel. pron.\
\\de which, who, that\
\\xv But nakka na-buyika ngal-bu ngalyod ngal-bu 'horn' ka-karrme...\
\\xe But that other one, the rainbow serpent which has horns...\
\
\\lx Bubbumukminj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx buboyen\
\\ps n.\
\\de Kune name for dialects of Mayali described as fv:na-rayek or 'hard dialects'.\
\\uv E\
\\an berreboyen\
\
\\lx Budberr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de billabong in fv:Kurulk clan estate.\
\
\\lx budbud\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kurrajong\
\\re red flowered kurrajong\
\\re fi:Brachychiton_paradoxum\
\\de Red flowered kurrajong.\
\\ee the seeds are edible and the bark is used to make string and fibre for various kinds of body adornment.\
\\sc Brachychiton paradoxum\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W,  Kun-walidjaw lect= man-marnanj, Djnj= an-marnanj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx budbud\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kurrajong\
\\re kurrajong tree\
\\re fi:Brachychiton_diversifolius\
\\de Northern kurrajong tree.\
\\sc Brachychiton diversifolius\
\\xv Kun-yarl njamed man-budbud birri-borolhmeninj...\
\\xe They made string from whatsit, fi:Brachychiton_diversifolius\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Buddumilirri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx budmanda\
\\ps n.\
\\de bag with personal possessions within\
\\bw from English portmentaux\
\
\\lx budme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\cf appears in fv:mimbudme\
\\de close eyes\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx budwok\
\\ps adv.\
\\de by foot\
\\bw from English 'foot walk'\
\\sy ku-rrenge.\
\
\\lx budj\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Lophostemon.sp.\
\\re fi:Lophostemon_grandiflorus\
\\de kind of tree (10-15m)\
\\xv An-budj karri Djalbangurrk, Maburrinj Kodwalewale makih.\
\\xe The fi:Lophostemon_grandiflorus tree grows in Djalbangurrk, Maburrinj and places like Kodwalewale.\
\\sc Lophostemon grandiflorus\
\\sy (m)an-bandad\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx budjdjulung\
\\ps n.\
\\de bottle\
\\bw from Makassarese b\'dbtolo? 'bottle'.\
\
\\lx budjiked\
\\ps n.\
\\re cat\
\\de Cat, feral cat.\
\\sy biyawo\
\\sd mammal\
\
\\lx budjno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge piss\
\\re urine\
\\de urine\
\\xv Budjno budjno maitbi nabang nakka, budjbang, ngarri-kukyayme.\
\\xe The urine, maybe the urine is poisonous, toxic piss, we would make us itch [kangaroo urine].\
\\sy dileno\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx budjub\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\pdv kk\
\\de digging stick\
\\pde kun-kanin\
\\xv Kun-budjub karri-modme karri-lurribme man-karremudyi.\
\\pde Kun-kanin karri-mang karri-karung karrbarda.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx buhme\
\\ps v.t/i.\
\\de 1. blow\
\\xv Kun-kurra ka-buhme, darnki mandjewk ka-djakdung.\
\\xe The wind is blowing, soon it's going to rain.\
\\xv Na-ngale ka-buhme mako?\
\\xe Who's going to play the didjeridoo?\
\\de 2. be blown on.\
\\xv Med nga-ladminj, ngarr-buhme.\
\\xe Hang on, I'm hot, let's take the breeze.\
\\pdn kk= burrhnjudjbonghme.\
\
\\lx buhmikan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re accompany on didjeridu\
\\de Play a didjeridu accompaniment for a singer.\
\\xv Na-ngale ngan-buhmikan bu nga-wayini?\
\\xe If I sing, who will accompany me on the didjeridu?\
\\dt 05/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx buk\
\\ps adj.\
\\de dry or shallow\
\\xv Bukminj rowk ka-mak karri-djowkke.\
\\xe It's all dry, we can cross OK.\
\\cf ka-bukme (v.i.)\
\\ce dry out\
\\cf kele-buk\
\\ce tame, not savage.\
\
\\lx Bukbirdidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge prop.n\
\\re placename on upper Cadell River\
\\de Place name on upper Cadell River upstream from Kunj Bolkdjowk. The site is said to be a nesting place of Bolung who lays her eggs there. The area was traditionally used as a place to gather fish with ichthycides (toxic plants used as fish poisons). Ancestral spirits at the site must be consulted before such fishing is carried out.\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx Bukbuk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx bukbuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pheasant\
\\re pheasant coucal\
\\re fi:Centropus_phasianinus\
\\de Pheasant coucal.\
\\sc Centropus phasianinus\
\\sd birds\
\
\\lx Bukbumukminj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge prop.n\
\\re placename in Waybburda estate\
\\de place in Waybburda estate\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx Bukburduk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in Kune speaking Bolkdjam estate.\
\\xv Bukburduk Balngarra bedberre.\
\\xe Bukburduk belongs to the Balngarra clan.\
\\uv E, Dangbon\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bukirribun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dream\
\\sy kodjbukirrire\
\\pdn kk= borridjbonghme\
\
\\lx bukka\
\\va bukkan\
\\ps dem.\
\\de that probably, over there probably, might be, thing\
\\nt illustrative sentence and part of speech.\
\
\\lx bukkaburd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de ceremony which involves the disinterment and painting of bones of the deceased.\
\
\\lx bukkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de show, demonstrate, teach, make manifest\
\\xv Wardi kan-bukkan bale ka-yime.\
\\xe Try and show me, what do you do?\
\\xv Ka-bukkarren nawu kun-djak karrih-karrme kuburrk kadberre.\
\\xe Symptoms which are manifest when we have physical illness.\
\\pdn kk= buyukme\
\
\\lx bukkarn\
\\pr kun-\
\\va bukkarnno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1. navel, umbilical cord 2. two dots at end of caudal area of kurrkurrbi (large catfish). (2: syn.\
dinjhno).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bukkulurl\
\\ps n.\
\\de full moon\
\
\\lx bukmen\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de dry up (of bodies of water), evaporate\
\\ee the word fv:-larrhme is used when speaking of things or people drying after getting wet.\
\\pdn kk= burnduyhmen\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Bukmoyik\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Balngarra clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en duwa.\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx bukno\
\\ps adj.\
\\de dry\
\\xv Bukno nani, yi-yawoyh-bo-ma.\
\\xe This one's dry, go and get some more water.\
\
\\lx Bukurruk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Barabba clan estate, within the Benebenemdi location\
\\uv E, D\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx bul\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fishtrap\
\\re fishtrap type\
\\de fish trap fence made from wooden stakes, paperbark, vines and dried vegetation. The fence is tied together with kurrajong or string made from fi:Acacia_difficilis bark. The fence is set into a billabong and as the water dries up the fish are trapped inside the area bounded by the fence.\
\\xv Bul kabirri-marnbun yekkekeno man-karnbirr ka-kobun. Bu man-djoh ka-kobun djenj kabirri-mang kun-ronj ka-burkmen djenj ka-ngimen ka-djardahme.\
\\xe They make the fish trap when the fi:Acacia_oncinocarpa trees flower. When the fi:Acacia_difficilis trees flower (later), they collect the fish which get stuck in the drying water.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\uv E\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bul\
\\va burl, burlng\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grub\
\\re grub, moth larvae, adult moth; tiny ant sp.\
\\de Grub, moth larvae, adult moth; tiny ant sp.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 18/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bula\
\\ps n.\
\\ge earthquake\
\\re earthquake\
\\de Earthquake; also the name of a Jawoyn ancestral being and concomitant religious cult in which earthquake and subterranean fire feature as part of apocalyptic beliefs.\
\\xv Yi-bekkang kukak bolkrokahrokang? Ngarri-ngeybun bula.\
\\xe Did you feel the earth shaking last night? We call that bula.\
Ane Bula kumwam Keyamongko beh, Keyamongko kurih konda Kunkumuruk way. \
Konda mani Bamboo Creek manu. Kunkumuruk crossing and manekke ngamed \
Keyamongko karrihkarri. Bula kume kumwam kurrmerrinj. And half kurrmerrinj kure \
Minjalang. Minjalang kumdolkkang kumekke half ngalengman kumwam konda dja \
ngalengman bolkmaddi. \
\\xe That Bula came from Keyamongko, from here Kunkumuruk way. Here at Bamboo Creek. \
Kunkumuruk crossing and to the west at Keyamongko. Bula came from there and put \
itself. And some of it is at Minjilang. Some went to Minjilang and remained there. \
\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 21/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx bulalh\
\\ps adj.\
\\de two\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde boken\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx bulanj\
\\va burlanj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\xv Kaluk Bulanj bi-marnedjareni ngaleng bu yiman birri-merrimeninj namekke. Bulanj nawu walk bi-kang yi-bengkan\
laik ngarr-binmarneyime 'Nani yi-kan kureh ba bininj yi-binmang yi-binreydurndeng ba karri-yakwon.'\
\\xe Another man of Bulanj subsection coveted her, (the boy's mother, a woman of Kodjdjan subsection), and wanted to marry her. Bulanj\
was going to accompany the boy to be circumcised according to the custom, like when we ask 'You take the circumcision candidate (to\
another group of people in a distant location) so that you will retrun with lots of people to complete the ceremony.'\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W, Kdj= na-kangila\
\\dt 08/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx bulanj\
\\pr na-\
\\va na-burlanj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv Ya, nakka na-buyikahme na-Marrku na-yik-Bulanj nani nawu lorrkkon\
ka-lorrkkonyo ka-rri djarrbirn nga-lorrkkonkurrmeng\
\\xe Yeah, another man, the late na-Bulanj subsection man of the Marrku clan who is now\
in that hollow log ossuary, the one with the spikes carved at the top. I put that hollow\
log there. \
\\sd kinship\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= kela\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx bulanj\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr al-\
\\va kalidjan\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:duwa patri-moiety and  fv:ngarradjku matri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and  fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv A: Bi-yawmey Bangardidjan?   B: Eh eh Kalidjan, ngal-Bulanj.\
\\xe A: His mother was Bangardidjan skin? B: No, Kalidjan, ngal-Bulanj.\
\\xv "Bu yiman yi-balwurdmarren wanjh yi-banbukkan wurdurd"\
ngandi-marneyimeng nawu kobohbanj laik ngaye ngarduk nawu yiman\
kayime fi:family. Ngal-Bulanj ngal-Kamarrang.\
\\xe "When you have children, then you teach the children", they said to us, the old\
women, just like in my family, my mother and my mother's mother, ngal-Bulanj and\
ngal-Kamarrang.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv W= ngal-bulanj, Kdj= al-bulanj\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= kalidjan\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx bulanjdjan\
\\va ngal-kangila\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\xv Bu an-yungki, makka djal Bininj duninj ba-wokyimi fi:like_old_people\
yiman ka-yime barri-yimi\'85 ngal-Kangilani, Bulanjdjan,\
ngal-Wurrbbarn-ni anekke.\
\\xe In the beginning, she (emu) was a human being and she talked, she was an old woman, old people, \'85 of the fv:ngal-Kangila subsection and the Wurrbbarn clan.\
\\xv Ngali bininj-ni ngalu ngurrurdu borledkerrinj nahni  birridolkang kungol, ngalih wanjh ngalebirri-bawong kukurlk ka-wake. Bulanjdjan ngal-Wurrbbarn. Yo. Ngal-nguyakimuk Bakkarda (Kardbam), Wurrbbarnbulu, Burnungku, Warrayhngu, Kamal. \
\\xe This emu was once a human being and... all the people here associated with her changed into animals (points to a painting illustrating\
this).  They flew up into the sky and they left her on the ground to walk around. Emu was a woman of Bulanjdjan subsection.  She is associated with many clans including Bakkarda-Kardbam, Wurrbbarnbulu, Burnungku, Warrayhngu, and Kamal.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W= ngal-kangila, Kdj= al-kangila\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bularl\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re |fi\{Pityrodia jamesii, Pityrodia pungens, Pityrodia ternifolia\}\
\\re Verticordia decussata\
\\de numerous shrubs of the Pityrodia genus\
\\xv Kure an-bularl alyurr ka-barnhbarndi ka-kongun.\
\\xe Leichhardt's grasshopper sits in Pityrodia shrubs and eats the flowers.\
\\sc Pityrodia jamesii, Pityrodia pungens, Pityrodia ternifolia\
\\ee Leichhardt's grasshoppers feed on the leaves (and flowers?) of Pityrodia shrubs. In Kundjeyhmi fi:Pityrodia_jamesii is called fv:alyurr,\
which is also the name of the grasshopper. This name in turn is also the name of the lightning spirit being associated with these\
grasshoppers which are only seen in the build-up season fv:kurrung and early wet fv:kunumeleng when there are many electrical\
storms.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sn 2\
\\re fi:Verticordia_decussata\
\\de small woody shrub (1-2m) of sandstone habitats\
\\xv An-bularl kan-dengedjurrudjudme.\
\\xe The fi:an-bularl shrub spikes our feet (when we walk on the dead leaves).\
\\sc Verticordia decussata\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Bularlhdja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fv:yirridjdja moiety clan with two lineages\
\\xv Njamed kenh kun-djare burda bi-djarebom. Konda Lorlo waleng ku-bolkBularlhdjakenh Bularlhdja bokenh kun-yed Yayminji and Lorlo. En njamed Karlbbarrad kun-yed. Ku-bolkburlarldjdjakenh, ku-djalbolkdanjbik kumekke\
kun-yed. \
\\xe However, she had refused to give him any of the bush tucker fi:(Hypoxis nervosa). From Lorlo it is Burlalhdja clan estate, there are\
two places [relevant to this emu story], Yayminji and Lorlo. And another place Karlbbarrad. Three places of the Burlalhdja clan. \
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bularlhdjina\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de eel species\
\
\\lx bularrbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1. erase, rub out\
\\de 2. finish a task\
\\xv Ngayeh nga-yakwon story nga-wernhbularrbun, nga-re, nga-re wanjh ku-wadda, ngah-durndeng.\
\\xe I'm going to finish telling all this information completely and then I'm off, I'm going back home.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bulbbe\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de dilly bag tightly woven from light fibres used for collecting wild honey\
\\sy kul-kolborn\
\
\\lx bulbebke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pull OBJ (usually large such as a yam) out of a bag\
\
\\lx buldi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lie buried\
\\xv Karrbarda karri-wilkdeng ka-buldi.\
\\xe We cook long yams buried in the ground.\
\
\\lx buldjdjarn\
\\va buldjarn\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Middle, centre.\
\\xv Ku-buldjdjarn yi-kurrmen.\
\\xe Put it in the middle.\
\\sn 2\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\pr ka-\
\\de Deep (of water or substance).\
\\xv ka-buldjarn\
\\xe It's deep.\
\\se kumurrng buldjdjarn\
\\ce very early before sunrise\
\\se Bininj buldjdjarn.\
\\de Ethnonymic reference: \'91the people from the middle/central regions\'92. This is one of several terms of this nature that indicate the place of origin of a person ideally through their matriline.\
\\dt 21/Apr/2015\
\
\\lx bule\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de ashes of a fire\
\\xv Karri-wilkdeng kun-bule karri-barrhbun.\
\\xe (When) we cook something under the ground we cover it over with ashes.\
\
\\lx bule ngarrku\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.kun-derbi kin term, eg. my father, your brother-in-law ie. fv:kanjok, you are my nephew.\
\\cn ngabbard.\
\\de 2.Your fv:mamamh, my son, you are my mother.\
\\cn na-bule ngarrku.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bule ngarrku\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. we both call aunty, you are my uncle/you are my nephew\
\\cn ngal-bule ngarrku.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bulembulem\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Eriachne_triseta\
\\sd plant\
\\de a kind of perennial grass with small yellow flowers\
\\sc Eriachne triseta\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bulembulem an-konamkuyeng\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\mr an-bulembulem an-konamkuyeng 'VEG-bulembulem VEG-tall'\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re fi:Aristeda_sp. (kind of grass)\
\\de kind of grass\
\\sc Aristeda sp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bulerri\
\\ps adj.\
\\de black\
\\sy -kurduk\
\\cf -bulerriwon\
\\xv kukbulerri\
\\xe black (skinned) person\
\\pdn kk= kurlngunj.\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx bulk\
\\ps n.\
\\re trade, exchange of goods\
\\de Trade goods and the system of regional trade or exchange in items of material culture and raw materials. Items such as pearl shell, and boomerangs were received into the Kakadu and west Arnhem Land region from places to the west and as far south as the Tanami desert. Bininj Kunwok speakers provided stone tools, ochre and bamboo spear shafts and other kinds of spears from their region as objects of exchange. \
\\cf Jawoyn fv:bulk \'91spear\'92\
\\dt 14/Jan/2016\
\
\\lx Bulkay\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de North of Mimanjarr crossing on the Tomkinson River flood plain. Bulkay is fv:na-Darnkorlo clan\
estate. It is a popular seasonal camp rich in food resources from early to middle dry season. Visited for\
fishing particularly barramundi and long necked turtles. fv:Bulkay is a 'big place' name.\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx bulkkidj\
\\ps interjection\
\\de 'Oh shit'; said after fumbling or dropping something.\
\
\\lx bulkkidjmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cause OBJ serious harm\
\\xv Ngun-bulkkidjmang yi-rrowen.\
\\xe He'll injure you and you'll get sick.\
\
\\lx bulkkidjmarren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de cause illness to one's self\
\\xv Kun-wern wungmeng bulkkidjmarrinj.\
\\xe He smoked too much and made himself seriously ill.\
\
\\lx bulkud\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Vigna_vexillata\
\\de Twining vine with perennial roots and annual slender hairy aerial stem. Leaves: trifoliate, slightly hairy both sides, centre leaflet largest, blades 70-120 mm long x 20-25 mm wide, elongated pointed tip, petiole 30-60 mm long. Flowers: pink or purple-mauve pea-flowers, 20-25 mm long, solitary or a few on long stalks. The tuber can be eaten raw. Emus eat the flowers.\
\\sc Vigna vexillata\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= an-kornak, Djnj= barddjubarr\
\\dt 04/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx Bulkudduyh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\lit "Bulkud (bush tucker) tuber"\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx bulkung\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Rock Fern\
\\sc Drynaria quercifolia.\
\\xv Manih man-bulkung mimih kah-ngun, man-me nuye.\
\\xe This Rock Fern is food which the fv:mimih spirits eat.\
\\de 2.fern species\
\\sc Blechnum orientale.\
\\ee This is food which people eat. The other fern species (Drynaria) also called fv:man-bulkung, is fv:mimih spirit food.\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bulkung\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge fern.sp.\
\\re fi:Blechnum_indicum (kind of fern)\
\\de kind of fern, the edible rhizome of which is pounded into a dry mash and mixed with honey\
\\xv Barri-ngolungi, an-bulkung berlno ba-rungi wanjh barri-borledkeyi yiken, barri-borledkeyi wanjh 'keyi' barri-bakkeyi \
ba-darlehmeninj. \
\\xe They would cook the fern on the top of the coals, turning it over and over until it dries out and snaps when you break it.\
\\sc Blechnum indicum\
\\uv Djnj (an-bulkung)\
\\ur\
\\sn 2\
\\ge fern.sp.\
\\re fi:Blechnum_orientale\
\\xv Manih man-bulkung mimih kah-ngun, man-me nuye.\
\\xe This drynaria fern is food which the fv:mimih spirits eat.\
\\sc Drynaria quercifolia\
\\uv I (man-bulkung)\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bulngbulng\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_gonocarpa\
\\de kind of grevillea shrub\
\\sc Acacia gonocarpa\
\\sy (m)an-djanjdjanj\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-djanjdjanj, W= man-djanjdjanj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Bulu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Dalabon patriclan\
\\xv Ka-djale kumekke kure ka-bawon yirridjdja man-wurrbbarnbuluken yerre na-marrkuken ka-bebme. Marrku ka-re,\
Kandjarrawali, Kandjarraken,  Kandjarrawali, ka-re Wakmarranjkenwali. Wakmarranjkenwali djuy! An nawu \
na-Kowarrangken bininj ka-yimarnebebme na-Barlbbahken na-Buluken.\
\\xe It keeps going until it leaves fi:yirridjdja moiety country in the Wurrbbarnbulu clan and then becomes Marrku clan. From Marrku it\
becomes Kandjarra and from Kandjarra the next clan is Wakmarranj. From Wakmarranj its a long way! Then you come to those\
people from the Kowarrang clan and then to Barlbbah and the Bulu clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx bulu\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Xanthostemon_paradoxus\
\\de small to medium tree (4-10m) with multi-stamened yellow flowers\
\\xv Man-bulu ka-kobun wanjh karndayh kam-re ku-djurle ka-ni. Ka-kobun ka-mulewan kun-balem ka-balemkimukminj.\
\\xe When the Xanthostemon tree flowers the female antilopine kangaroos come to sit in the shade (of those trees). The tree flowers and it indicates that they (the kangaroos) are now really fat.\
\\sc Xanthostemon paradoxus\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bulubbi\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de bush potato\
\\sc Eriosema chinensis\
\\ee tuber cooked\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx buludjdjurri\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Stringybark tree.\
\\sc E. tetrodonta.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-burluddak\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx buludjirrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Black Kite\
\\sc Milvus migrans\
\
\\lx buluk\
\\va burluk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de sacred down used for body decoration in secret ceremony\
\\ee fv:buluk is not normally discussed much in public and can have a dangerous aspect eg. healers can\
extract pieces of fv:buluk from inside the bodies of those who are sick.\
\\cf -bulukbun\
\\ce Place ceremonial down on someone's body.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bulukbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de stick sacred ceremonial down (or nowadays cotton wool) onto the body.\
\\xv Kamarrang wam mayh ka-bulukburren.\
\\xe Kamarrang has gone to the sacred ceremony and is putting ceremonial down on his body.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bulukki\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de cattle, male or female\
\\bw from English 'bullock'.\
\
\\lx bulukkirri\
\\va bulukurri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de freshwater eels, single gilled eel\
\\sc Synbranchus bengalensis, Ophisternon gutturale\
\\ee kuk-yirrek\
\\xe Slippery body.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bulukmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr buluk 'body down decoration' + -mang 'get'\
\\ge use.as.down\
\\re use as down in ceremonial ritual\
\\de use as woolly down stuck to the body in certain ceremonies\
\\xv Buluk dorrengh anbu an-djedj, Lorrkkon Kunabibi karri-bulukmang.\
\\xe The kapok tree has down used for body decoration in the hollow log and Kunabibi ceremonies.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\ee Whilst fv:buluk 'body down' for ceremonial use is not strictly a subject classed as secret, public discussion of this substance is usually\
restricted to men who are initiated into ceremonies in which it is used.\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Bulumbulu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Rembarrnga speaking yirridjdja moiety patriclan\
\\xv Nawu Bulumbulu kun-dangwok bedberre, wohwoh kabarri-yime.\
\\xe The Bulumbulu clan interjection fi:(kun-dangwok) is called 'wohwoh'.\
\\xv Yo Kabirlingu namekke dawurro ngadberre, kadberre. Ngal-yikBakkarda, Bakkarda Wurrbbarn-bulu, Kabirlingu\
Mowalangu Bulumbulu. Dawurro, ka-karrme ngal-nguyakimuk.\
\\xe Yes, that clan Kabirlingu is part of ours, including you [clan confederation relating to the emu]. [Others include] the Bakkarda\
fi:yikurrumu and the Wurrbbarn, Kabirlingu, Mowalangu and Bulumbulu clans. There are a big number of clans in that confederation\
for her [the emu].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx bulumen\
\\de attested in fv:kodjbulumen, to develop grey hair.\
\
\\lx Bulumo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan on the southern Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Kabanibirliyingarrnghmang ka-bolkbulumo.\
\\xe Kabanibirliyingarrnghmang is a place belonging to the Bulumo clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so LBN\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bulurr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge goanna sp.\
\\re Black-spoteed ridge-tailed monitor\
\\de Black-spoteed ridge-tailed monitor. Inhabits rock country, stony hills and residual rocky outliers, growing to about 60cm and is reddish-brown with scattered dark brown and black spots mixed with lighter cream coloured flecks on the torso. The tail (darker in colour than the torso) has a double row of enlarged, keeled scales (Cogger 2000:361).\
\\xv Bulurr bodmedarrkdarrk.\
\\xe fv:Bulurr has a back like a wood rasp.\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, W?\
\\ur E= birrem, nabadbirrem\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\sc Varanus baritji\
\\bb Cogger 2000:360-1)\
\\dt 02/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx bulurru-\
\\ps v.pref.\
\\de tracks of any animal\
\\xv Ka-bulurru-yo.\
\\xe There's tracks.\
\\xv Ka-bulurru-di.\
\\xe There's tracks.\
\
\\lx bulurru-yo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de animal tracks\
\\sy bok-yo.\
\
\\lx buluwirdwird\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Northern Rosella\
\\sc Platycercus venustus\
\\sy djaddokorddokord, djardakorddokkord.\
\
\\lx Buluwunwun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de clan name in south-east of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Miyuku bolkBolmo wanjh kaddum Buluwunwun wanjh ka-yimerran.\
\\xe The place Miyuku [on Marlkawo Creek] is Bolmo clan land but upstream from there it becomes Buluwunwun.\
\\ee The Rembarrnga equivalent of this clan name is fv:B\'9cl\'9cw\'9crnw\'9crn.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx bulerri\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de aboriginal person, black skinned person\
\\xv Birri-bulerri.\
\\xe Black skinned people.\
\
\\lx bulerriwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de blacken\
\\xv Kan-marnebulerriwong.\
\\xe You have blackened me, put black on me (eg. charcoal).\
\\pdn kk= kurlngunjweybun\
\
\\lx bumabuma\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\sn 1.\
\\de mythical hero ancestor who turned into a bat.\
\\xv Daluk bi-kang bi-yi-wam Bumabuma marnburrinj warlang wanjh.\
\\xe He took the women, went with her and then turned himself into a bat.\
\\de 2.Ghost Bat\
\\sc Macroderma gigas.\
\\dt 14/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx bun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.hit,strike\
\\xv Ngurri-bawoyinj ngane-niwirrinj. Kun-berl ngan-marne-bom.\
\\xe You mob should leave him, we two should stay together. He broke my arm (words to a fv:wurrurrumi\
style song).\
\\de 2. kill, injure\
\\xv Ngayi minj nga-re , wardi ngan-bun mayh.\
\\xe I don't go there otherwise that snake might kill me.\
\\de 3. burn\
\\xv Man-bang manekke ngan-djen-bom.\
\\xe That food's strong, it burnt my tongue.\
\\de 4. produce\
\\xv Manih kun-dulk yekke ka-nguy-bun.\
\\xe This tree produces flowers in the dry season.\
\\de 5.suffer effects of a storm, be rained on\
\\xv Man-djewk ngan-bom ngadberre.\
\\xe The storm fell on us.\
\\de 6. 'ring' on the telephone.\
\\xv Kaluk kukak kabirri-bun delebon birri-yimeng.\
\\xe They said they would ring up by phone tonight.\
\\cf burren\
\\ce fight\
\\xv Kabirri-burren.\
\\xe They are fighting.\
\\pdn kk= bonghme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bun\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de ankle\
\
\\lx bunbarr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Corynotheca lateriflora\
\\ee A herb used to flavour kangaroo meat when cooked in ground ovens.\
\\xv Barlbbanarra kerri-yikang, kun-kerri 'and' man-bunbarr.\
\\xe He went to Barlbbanarra for ant-bed (for a ground oven), ant-bed and Corynotheca lateriflora (to flavour the kangaroo meat).\
\\uv E= bunbarr (no prefix).\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bunbarr\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Corynotheca_lateriflora\
\\de A herb used for flavouring meat cooked in ground ovens.\
\\sc Corynotheca lateriflora\
\\xv "Ngurrim-ray karri-munkewe kare," wanjh birri-munkeweng mayh, ngurrurdu mayh ngurrurdu ma birri-munkeweng wam kure yiman kondanj dolkkang la Barlbbanarra, Barlbbanarra kerriyikang, kun-kerri dja man-bunbarr.\
\\xe "Everyone come here, let's send her [emu] away," and so they sent emu off a long way to get oven stones and the herb fi:Corynotheca_lateriflora to flavour the meat.\
\\uv Djnj, I, W\
\\ur E= bunbarr\
\\sd plant\
\\so Mick Kubarkku\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bunbel\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de spoon bill (corruption of English 'spoonbill')\
\\cf see fv:muluyh-muluy\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bunbun\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de string worn on head and said to imbue the wearer with mystical powers.\
\\xv Bunbun ka-yime man-kordang ka-karrme.\
\\xe fv:Bunbun string has mystical power.\
\
\\lx buredi\
\\ps n.\
\\re bread\
\\de Bread, borrowed from English \'91bread\'92.\
\\dt 08/Jan/2015\
\
\\lx burnbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de finish, stop\
\\xv Mayh ngarri-yakwong, bonj burnbom.\
\\xe We completed the ceremony and now it's finished.\
\
\\lx bundak\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re poisonous plant (unidentified)\
\\de kind of poisonous plant\
\\xv Anbundak anbang.\
\\xe The fi:an-bundak plant is poisonous.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc unidentified\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bundjak\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lerp\
\\re lerp\
\\de Edible lerps, which are the white tent-like shelters that tiny psyllid insects make on eucalyptus or bloodwood leaves.\
\\sy man-buyali\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bung\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ant.sp.\
\\re ant sp.\
\\de very small ant sp.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx Bung Kabaddudjeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place name of a hill in Rol clan estate near Mokmek crossing (on the Manmoyi to Marlkawo road)\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Bungkurl\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\uc0\u8232 \\de Billabong and surrounding savanna on a tributary of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek, which flows in to the main creek from the east and follows the Nabarlek road. This is probably the area around the creek crossing after the Gunbalanya-Nabarlek road curves to the south, east of the Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek crossing proper. Significant as a fishing area.\
\\xv Bungkurl ka-kolung kun-labbarl djenj na-wuken.\uc0\u8232 \\xe Bungkurl goes down to a billabong, a traditional fishing place.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx bungkurl\
\\va bungkul\
\\ps n.\
\\re dance style, music style\
\\de Genre of dance and music associated with people living to the south-east and east of the Arnhem Land plateau including Rembarrnga, Burarra and all Yolngu groups. Used in opposition to the musical genre called fv:kun-borrk in Bininj Kunwok.\
\\sd music\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx bune\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bloodwood.sp\
\\re fi:Corymbia_polycarpa\
\\re bloodwood sp.\
\\re long-fruited bloodwood\
\\de Long-fruited bloodwood, associated with fv:duwa moiety. Flowering is cue for the start of fv:yekke season.\
\\ee Bloodwoods on the Arnhem Land plateau are often very difficult to categorise and identify. What is sometimes known by one name in the scientific taxonomy system may have more than one name in Bininj Kunwok. Another name which could also refer to a very similar kind of bloodwood is fv:an-dumurluh.\
\\xv An-bune an-werrkyahwurd, kukabo, rorrbono ka-rrangen.\
\\xe The fi:Corymbia_polycarpa tree has a fine bark of small flakes and grows on alluvial flats near creeks.\
\\xv Rorrbono an-bunewern.\
\\xe An alluvial flat dominated by fi:Corymbia_polycarpa trees.\
\\sc possibly fi:Corymbia_polycarpa\
\\uv I (man-bune), Djnj (an-bune), Kdj= an-bunuy\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx buneh\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\va bunehno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lily.rhizomme\
\\re rhizome of Nelumba lily\
\\de cooked rhizomes of the Nelumba 'red lily'\
\\xv Bunehno barri-kerribuni ba-kobkeyi wanjh barri-nguni.\
\\xe They would cook the rhizomes and they would become soft and they would eat them.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx bunehno\
\\cf see anbuneh\
\
\\lx Bunidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de a name for two geographically discontiguous clans in Kakadu National Park and north-western Arnhem Land, the latter associated with the Amurdak language and former with the Gaagadju language.\
\\xv Birri-bunidj kun-red bedberre yiman ka-yime Madjikkarra. Nayidjdji nungka na-Bunidj.\
\\xe The Bunidj people have country such as at Madjikkarra. [Bill] Nayidjdji is a Bunidj clansman.\
\\sd clan_name \
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx buningkid\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\va (m)an-burningkid\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Terminalia_ferdinandiana (short variety)\
\\de short specimen of billy goat plum which are no more than a metre high. The tall version is called fv:(m)an-marlak in Kundedjnjenghmi and Kunwinjku and man-djiribidj in Kuninjku.\
\\xv An-buningkid, an-marlak kanjdji ka-yo.\
\\xe The fv:an-buningkid is a low growing billy goat plum.\
\\sc Terminalia ferdinandiana\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 22/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Bunungku\
\\va Burnungku\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan associated with the Kune and Rembarrnga languages\
\\xv Kodjdjan ngal-Bunungku yerri bad kun-Buluwunwun en kun-madjdjalum kakkak.\
\\xe Kodjdjan is a member of the Bunungku clan but her mother is Buluwunwun and her mother's mother was from the Madjdjalum clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx bunj\
\\ps n.\
\\de bunch or bundle of thin elongate objects such as spears\
\\xv Ba konda ngarri-wurdurdni wanjh ngarri-re kun-red ngarri-yoy an-kole arri-bunjyikani\
ngarri-yoy konda kurebeh bu ngarri-bunjyibidbuni.\
\\xe Here when we were kids we'd go to the camp and sleep there with a bunch of spears and here on the\
other side we'd climb up with a bunch [of spears].\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx bunjhmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de kiss\
\\cf Kabene-bunjhmarren. (check spelling)\
\\ce They are kissing each other.\
\
\\lx burd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Spangled Grunter.\
\\sy bokorn\
\\xv "Ngudda wanjh, ngudda kanh-kornmud-yirridjmeng ngarrewoneng." "Ngayi wanjh kayakki, la burd nakka."\
\\xe "It was you, you who pulled on our pubic hair." "It wasn't me, it was those little Grunter fish."\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= boddowk\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burda\
\\ps n.\
\\ge twist.tobacco\
\\re twist tobacco\
\\de (archaic) twist tobacco, popular up until the 1950s\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx burda\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Curculigo_ensifolia (plant sp.)\
\\de kind of edible tuber available in fv:bangkerreng late wet season\
\\xv An-burda arri-dong arri-bekmarnbun.\
\\xe We pound the fi:Curculigo_ensifolia tuber to make a mash.\
\\sc Curculigo ensifolia\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur Kdj (syn.)= an-mulbirrk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Burdanjberre\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx burdbarrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de corm of white flowered lily\
\\sc Nymphaea sp. (e.g. Nymphaea gigantea)\
\\pdn kk= man-marrbalk\
\\uv I\
\\uv W= man-dem\
\\dt 25/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx burddal\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial grouping of the following subsections; ngarridj/ngarridjdjan, bangardi/bangardidjan\
kamarrang/kamanj, balang/belinj\
\\cf kuyal\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burddji\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1. smell of people which can be ritually rubbed on other people and objects.\
\\xv Djarre karri-kerrebun la kun-burddji.\
\\xe Let's cook it a long way away because of the scent. (It is considered ritually dangerous to cook meat in\
a ground oven close to where people are living or camping).\
\\de 2. indication of the person responsible for killing game.\
\\xe Nganabbarru kanjno ka-rri kumekke Kamarrang burddji.\
\\xe There's buffalo meat there which Kamarrang got (by killing the animal when hunting).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burddjimak\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\mr burddji+mak 'scent+good'\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re plant sp. (unidentified)\
\\de kind of plant\
\\sd plant\
\\sc unidentified\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx burddji-nome\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de smell scent of a person/animal\
\\xv Kunj kawong, bi-burddji-nomeng.\
\\xe The kangaroo jumped away in fright, it smelled his scent.\
\
\
\\lx burdebme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de rub quickly back and forwards between the hands such as in the use of fire sticks.\
\\xv An marrek karremeninj, djuluyak. ngarri-burdebmeninj 'Aboriginal one'\
ngarri-burdebburdebmeninj ngarri-wurlkkemeninj nani kayakki djulu-yak.\
\\xe And, we didn't have these before, no matches. We used to rub sticks together, Aboriginal way was to\
rub sticks together to light a fire, we didn't have these matches.\
\\pdn kk= bidjirrbonghme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Bordoh\
\\ce variant pronunciation of the clan name fv:Burdoh\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx Burdoh\
\\va Bordoh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan with territory on the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Manih birri-burdoh bedberre birri-bidkuykmerrinj.\
\\xe These hand stencils here were made by people of the Burdoh clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so Mick Kubarkku\
\\dt 09/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx burdohburdoh\
\\va burdoh\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge clan.lect\
\\re clan lect interjection \
\\de clan lect interjection or fi:kundangwok of the Burdoh clan said by speakers of this clan as a mark of social identity\
\\xv Munguyh birri-rayi kudkudmeninj nungka Kodjok bi-djawayi 'Bordoh yi-karrmeh?' 'Nga-karrme' yimeninj. Durndeyi\
birri-wayiniwirrinj birri-rayi,'Wardbukkarra-wardbukkarra djingakbangakba muyumuy kayakay.' Nakkan marrek\
"kayakay" ngurri-yime, dja "muyumuy" ngurri-yime, wardi ngun-bekkan ngudberre kabi-bun'.  \
\\xe They kept walking a long way and Kodjok called out to his brother 'Brother have you still got him?' 'I'm still holding him' he replied.\
He ran back to the others who were singing as they went 'Wardbukkarra-wardbukkarra djingakbangakba nguyunguy kayakay. 'Hey,\
don't call out "kayakay", just say "muyumuy" otherwise he'll hear you and kill him [my brother]'. \
\\so Lena Yarinkura\
\\dt 09/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx burdurru\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge hardyhead\
\\re hardyhead fish\
\\re fi:Cratercephalus_marjoriae\
\\de Marjories freshwater hardyhead and other hardyheads.\
\\sc Cratercephalus marjoriae\
\\sn 2\
\\ge blue.eye\
\\re Arnhem Land blue-eye\
\\re blue-eye fish\
\\re fi:Pseudomugil_tenellus\
\\de Arnhem Land blue-eye\
\\sc Pseudomugil tenellus\
\\sn 3\
\\ge mullet\
\\re mullet spp.\
\\de various mullet spp.\
\\sc Liza spp.\
\\sy kuwalili\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burlbaba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de storm which looks threatening (e.g. dark clouds and thunder) but doesn't produce rain.\
\\xv Burlbaba ka-rrolkan djewkyak, narlangak nuye.\
\\xe Burlbaba storms rise up but don't rain. They belong to the frilled neck lizard (totem).\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burlbburlmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become tired or exhausted from exertion.\
\\pdn kk= burlbburlbonghmen\
\
\\lx burlburl\
\\pr kun-\
\\va bulbul?\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Paperbark trees\
\\sc Melaleuca spp.\
\\xv Man-djil kan-bonghme karri-dokan karri-bonghme kun-burlburl karri-kumbehmerren.\
\\xn Man-djewk kan-bun kari-re karri-kodbun karri-barrhburren.\
\\xe The rain is falling on us, let\'92s build a shelter from paperbark.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-kod, kun-kod\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burldjeno\
\\va kun-burldje\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de fish stomach\
\\xv Burldjeno, kanjdji. Yi-bengkan namarnkorl kanjdji karri-ngukwe bad karri-mang anbu 'round one', burldjenno.\
\\xe The fish's stomach. You know under the barramundi, (when) we throw away the guts but we take out that round-shaped thing called the fv:burldjeno.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burlnjinh\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de male pubic coverings made from tassles of bush string or sometimes feathers of parrots and painted\
with ochres.\
\\xv Burlnjinh karri-djarrberlke.\
\\xn Mokkoyh karri-kurrme.\
\\xe Let\'92s wear a pubic apron.\
\\sy mokkoyh\
\\uv E and REM= djurddjurd\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx bulng\
\\va burl, bul\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge boil\
\\re boil infection\
\\de Boil (staphylococcus infection).\
\\sn 2\
\\ge grub\
\\re grub, moth larvae, adult moth\
\\de Grub, moth larvae, adult moth.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge ant.sp.\
\\re ant sp.\
\\de Tiny ant species.\
\\dt 18/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx burlnjinh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de pubic covering made from string of fv:man-budbud.\
\\pdv kk (sometimes used in ordinary speech also)\
\\pde mokkoyh\
\\xv Nameke nakka na-kare 'old fashioned one' nani nawu 'Aboriginal one' ngarri-djongburrinj ngarri-dumedukkarrinj en ngarri-burlnjinhdi.\
\\xe That's an old fashioned Aboriginal way of dressing, we used to put those on and tie them around our backs and wear what is called fv:burlnjinh (a pubic covering).\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burluddak\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge eucalypt.sp.\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_tetrodonta\
\\de stringybark\
\\sc Eucalyptus tetrodonta\
\\ee This tree has many uses. The bark is cut off and used for housing, and for the surface on which the famous Arnhem Land bark\
paintings are created. Special goose egg collecting canoes were also made from the bark of fi:Eucalyptus_tetrodonta\
\\xv Kaluk karrikad nga-kuyinkokmi weleng kalaba ngan-marnekomberhmeng mi-burluddakkah.\
\\xe Then I just turned my head to the west and there was standing up tall for me, a male antilopine kangaroo in a grove of stringybark trees.\
\\xv An-burluddak ka-bun kongno kun-kong ka-bun wanjh ka-kurrmehkrrme ka-welengwirlarrkkabun\
\\xe She [the emu] hits the stringbark tree to knock off the bark which she places to make a nest so the eggs can be incubated.\
\\uv Djnj, I, E\
\\ur Kdj= an-bordokorr, an-rebel\
\\sy (m)an-bordokorr\
\\pdn man-buludjurri\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx burludjurri\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de stringybark\
\\sc Eucalyptus tetrodonta\
\\pde man-burluddak.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burlume\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de praise\
\
\\lx burlumerren\
\\ps v.reflex.\
\\de 1.show off, perform\
\\xv Ma karri-re karri-borrkke karri-burlumerren.\
\\xe OK lets go and dance and show ourselves off (put on a good show).\
\\de 2. stalk prey when hunting\
\
\\lx burlurlhbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swell up\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde burlurlhme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burlurlhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swell up\
\\xv mim-burlurlhmeng\
\\xe swollen eye\
\\cf lurlmeng\
\\ce swollen\
\\pdn kk= burlurlhbonghme\
\
\\lx burnbonghke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de silence, make quiet\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde ngurdke\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burnbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de cease making noise\
\\pde ngurdme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burnda\
\\pr man-\
\\va burnda fs:(no_prefix)\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Phyllanthus.urinaria\
\\re fi:Phyllanthus_urinaria\
\\de a small annual herb\
\\sc Phyllanthus urinaria\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Hypoxis.nervosa\
\\re fi:Hypoxis_nervosa\
\\de Short fleshy grass with edible fleshy roots/thin tubers.\
\\xv Ba-djalwam, konda ba-rrurrkmeng man-burnda ba-yini.\
\\xe He kept going and here he pulled up fi:Hypoxis_nervosa herb and sat there with it.\
\\un fv:man-djay =fv:yirridjdja moiety name, fv:burnda =fv:duwa moiety name\
\\sc Hypoxis nervosa\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx burndih\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de hair\
\\pde kun-marre.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burnduburndu\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Tephrosia_spp. (kind of shrub)\
\\de kind of shrub either Tephrosia spp.or Cassia leptoclada \
\\sc Tephrosia spp., Cassia leptoclada \
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj= fi:Tephrosia_spp., I= fi:Cassia_leptoclada \
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx burnduyhmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dry up\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bukmen\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burndjingh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de small garden or fence skinks such as snake-eyed skinks. Average size 9cm.\
\\sc Cryptoblepharus spp.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burnkurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge jellyfish\
\\re jellyfish\
\\de jellyfish 2. octopus/squid.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge octopus/squid\
\\re octopus/squid\
\\re squid/octopus\
\\de Octopus and squid.\
\\sd fish\
\
\\lx burarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge water.goanna\
\\re water goanna\
\\re Merten's water goanna\
\\re fi:Varanus_mertensi\
\\de Merten's Water Monitor\
\\sy W= durrbu\
\\sc Veranus mertensi\
\\pdn kk= dedjronj, djingronj\
\\uv E = djarrkka\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Burarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language of lower Blyth River\
\\de Language of people from the lower Blyth River and Milingimbi.\
\\dt 18/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx Burinmarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name\
\\de the fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name of the Darnkorlo clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx burudjang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge no.reason\
\\re without a motivation or cause\
\\de Without purpose or cause, lacking a motivation, with no specific intent\
\\xv Djal burudjang bi-bom.\
\\xe He just hit him for no reason.\
\\dt 29/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx burrabburra\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.fungal itch, ringworm 2. scabies\
\\uv E,I\
\\sy barrdjak\
\\uv W= djilimin\
\\bw Note Makassarese puru-puru 'pimples, pustules' and Malay puru 'sore, ulcer'.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx burralkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de to perform ceremonial action. Also used to describe the ritualistic behaviour of animals.\
\\xv Wok diwirrinj "karlangalangalangalangalang," yimeninj nawu wanahwam burralkmeng\
Rumburre nakka wanjh. Yi-bengkan, lorrkkon kah-burralkme.\
\\xe He would make this sound.He says "karlangalangalangalangalang" as he goes along with his own\
particular actions,that's what Rumburre does.You know he performs in the lorrkkon ceremony.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Burranjila\
\\ps place n.\
\\ge place_n.\
\\re placename\
\\de Estate name, on the upper Cadell River south-east of Dubuhdarr\
\\ee Near Burranjila is a famous quarry for a dark red quartzite which is highly prized and used to fashion fv:yorndidj spear points and blades.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burrba\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de cloth, men's ceremonial loin cloth\
\\sy korrh\
\\pdn kk= korrh\
\
\\lx burre\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-, ngan-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Ipomoea_dunlopii\
\\de Slightly woody vine climbing high in surrounding trees; very closely related to fi:Ipomea_abrupta. The leaves are narrow to broadly ovate or triangular, blade 50-150 mm long x 15-120 mm wide, sometimes with rounded spear shaped lobes at the base, petiole 25-75 mm long. The flowers are funnel-shaped, mauve to purple with darker throat, petals 65 mm to 85 mm long.The fruit is a globular capsule, 10-14 mm diameter with 4 black seeds to 7 mm long covered in long dense sinuous white to pale brown hairs to 4 mm long. The tubers or 'yams' are roasted on coals before being eaten. The name may also be applied to fi:Stephania_japonica and fi:Decaschistia_byrnesii.\
\\xv An-burre makka an-kimuk, makka an-yayawno, bininjken. Barrk ngaleng kaworrngun, djukerre ka-worrngun.\
\\xe fi:Ipomoea_dunlopii is much bigger but this one I'm talking about, something people can eat, is much smaller. fv:an-burre is for humans but the black wallaroo would eat the leaves of it.\
\\xv An-warddewaken, bad mimih ke ka-ngun, ka-ngun ngalekke mimih, an-yong, ngan-burre, nguddah, bulanj, yi-ngeybun, karri-ngeybun mah ngan-burre.\
\\xe It grows in the rock country but mimih eat it, those mimih (women) eat it, that bush radish tuber, Bulanj, you eastern people call it ngan-burre [manburre], well we all call it that.\
\\sd plant\
\\so Bardayal Nadjamerrek\
\\sy an-yong\
\\sc Ipomoea dunlopii\
\\uv W, I, E, Kdj\
\\ur Djnj= an-yong\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx burren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge fight.refl.\
\\re fight each other\
\\de Fight one another.\
\\xv ...bi-karrmeng bi-djorrhdukkang kondah."Wa, wa waw, waw yimeng waw, wanjh\
beneh-burrinj, beneh-burrinj, kurebeh, kondabeh beneh-burrinj\
\\xe He grabbed him and held him around the waist here. "Ow, ow",he cried and they both fought and fought all over the place.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge cut.self\
\\re apply force to self\
\\de Apply force to self (e.g. rip out facial hair)\
\\xv Kun-bidi korroko nga-djawurrkburreni.\
\\xe A long time ago I used to rip out my beard with beeswax.\
\\dt 20/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx burrhbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de clap\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde (bid)burrhme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de clap\
\\xv Karri-bid-burrhme.\
\\xe We clap our hands.\
\\sy bid-dowkme\
\\pdn kk= burrhbonghme\
\
\\lx burrhnjudjbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de blow\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde buhme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burrhnjudjbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de blow, play didjeridu\
\\pde buhme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burribawon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de duck out of the trajectory of a flying object\
\\xv Ka-djorrhyirdebme marneburribawon ngun-bardkarlangderhme.\
\\xe The head of the axe flies off, I jump out of its path and it chops into your knee cap (words to a\
fv:wurrurrumi style song about two spirits chopping with a stone axe for honey in a log. The axe head\
flies off and chops his brother's leg off).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burriwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de throw hard, chuck\
\\xv Yim-burriwemen!\
\\xe Chuck it over here to me!\
\\xv Bi-kuk-burriweng.\
\\xe She pushed him down.\
\\pdn kk= warlhke\
\
\\lx burrk\
\\ps n./pred. adj.\
\\ge deep\
\\re deep\
\\re middle part\
\\de Deep part, middle area.\
\\xv Ka-boburrk.\
\\xe The water is deep.\
\\dt 20/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx burrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.shape or form 2. body\
\\xv na-burrk-kimuk\
\\xe big bodied person\
\\xv Nawu birrem kun-burrk yiman kalawan la berdno yiman danngarr.\
\\xe fv:Birrem has the shape of a sand monitor and the tail of a frilled-neck lizard.\
\\pdn kk= kun-walnga, kun-darrkid.\
\
\\lx burrkburrk-bekkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.understand fully, have clear insight.\
\\de 2. ascertain the cause of an illness by feeling the body of the patient by hand. This is a practice of\
traditional healers.\
\\xv Na-kordang kandi-burrkburrk-bekkan.\
\\xe Medicine men feel our bodies to determine the cause of an illness.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burrkburrkbengkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de know something intimately or properly, to understand with clarity and insight.\
\\xv Kun-red marrek baleh ka-yime might be ka-bengkan ba kah-burrkburrkbengkan or might\
be djurra ka-re kabani-munkewe.\
\\xe Why do they want to know about this country; is it to have clear intimate knowledge about the place or\
are these two going to send some document [about what they know] to someone.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burrkel\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de march fly\
\
\\lx burrkerhbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de burp\
\
\\lx burrk-kimukmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de increase in body weight and size\
\
\\lx burrk-nan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de recognise\
\\pdn kk= walnga-kurrurdme\
\
\\lx burrkok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de channel-billed cuckoo\
\\uv E\
\\nt check\
\
\\lx burrkyak\
\\ps interj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de no, nothing\
\\uv W\
\\uv I/E= kayakki\
\\sn 2.\
\\ps n.\
\\de dialect name\
\\ee Used by Kuninjku or eastern dialect speakers to describe the western Kunwinjku dialect speakers such\
as is spoken at Kunbarlanja (Oenpelli).\
\\xv But really ngarri-ngeybun boddowk ngad, some Burrkyak kabirri-yime bokorn.\
\\xe We really call that fish 'boddowk' but some western dialect speakers call it 'bokorn'.\
\\ng see also fv:kundangburddjikaberrk and fv:kundangyohmi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx burrmurle\
\\ps n.\
\\re hornet sp.\
\\de Hornet species.\
\\sc (family) Vespidae\
\\nt check spelling\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 01/Sept/2014\
\
\\lx burrnguk\
\\ps n.\
\\re stingray sp.\
\\re spotted stingray sp.\
\\de Spotted stingray species.\
\\sy na-warla\
\\uv I\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 01/Sept/2014\
\
\\lx burruburrudaken\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de kind of beetle which buries itself into the ground, found on the (Arnhem Land) plateau.\
\\xv Dumdum burruburrudaken biddengdeng.\
\\xe The beetle called burruburrudaken has solid/strong claws.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burruddjang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de cloth, hankerchief, cotton cloth strips used as a decoration in woven fibre bags.\
\
\\lx burrudjurri\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Darwin Woollybutt\
\\sc Eucalyptus miniata\
\\pdv kk\
\\sy djerrngkolh\
\\pde man-barlanjdjarr (I), man-djalen (W), an-djalen (Kdj, Djnj)\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx burruhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de clap hands\
\\xv Ma yawurrinj ngurri-burruhmen!\
\\xe OK you boys clap your hands.\
\\sy bid-dowkme\
\
\\lx burrulhmi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de a very large Spangled Grunter / Jewel Perch\
\\sc Leiopotherapon unicolor\
\
\\lx burrungandi\
\\ps n.\
\\re sandstone snake-necked turtle\
\\de Sandstone Snake-necked Turtle, found in the plateau rock country creeks and rcky waterholes. Also in the Kimberley Region of Western Australia. The scientific name uses the Kundjeyhmi word which is almost identical but has a final palatal consonant.\
\\xv Burrungandi kuberrk ka-yo. Kondah larrk. Kure Beswick ka-rri ka-rrudjerren.\
\\xe The sandstone snake-necked turtle lives out in the open. They're not found here (central Arnhem Land). They down near Beswick and they bury themselves in the ground.\
\\sc Chelodina (Macrochelodina) burrungandjii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= burrungandji\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx burrurnburrurn\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\va burrurnburrurn fs:(no_prefix)\
\\ps n.\
\\re dodder laurel\
\\re fi:Cassytha_filiformis, fi:Cassytha_candida\
\\de Dodder laurel; leafless climber with fine hairy green to orange stems, twining and attaching with small suckers to other plants; sometimes forms a dense mat smothering trees and shrubs. Produces edible fruits in fv:yekke and fv:wurrkeng and is also a favourite food of emus. The fruits are small smooth globular capsules, to 8 mm diameter, greenish-white or orange when ripe; single round seed.\
\\xv Man-me kabirri-ngun burrurnburrurn dja mani kabirri-ngun yibengkan windilk, windilk mimno. \
\\xe They [emus] eat dodder laurel fruit fi:Cassytha_filiformis and the seeds of the dye grass fi:Haemodorum_coccineum.\
\\xv Ka-djalwohre, kaluk minj ka-wirlengurdme  ngal-wohwern ngal-wohwern ka-re burrurnburrurn ka-ngun mak\
an-lerrelerre ka-ngun. Anbedjdja kangun anbarlarra ka-ngun.\
\\xe She [emu] wanders continuously, and she doesn't stop walking around, she goes from place to place and eats fi:Cassytha_filiformis and fi:Bossiaea_bossaeoides [flowers of].\
\\sc Cassytha filiformis, Cassytha candida\
\\sy bin fs:(fruit_only)\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx buyali\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge manna\
\\re manna, Eucalyptus manna\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of Eucalypt manna, i.e. edible mealy flakes which fall from the leaves or are licked off the leaves ;\
contrasted with a smaller variety known as <manjmin>.\
\\xv Bedman mak daluk bedberre and bedman mak birri-rayinj birri-yawayi man-kung. Man-kung man-buyali, ma-yawok,\
karrbarda bedman kunj birri-djangkayi nawu.  \
\\xe Their women folk too would go out in search of wild honey. Honey and eucalyptus manna, round yams, long yams, along with those\
(men) who used to go out hunting kangaroos.\
\\so Kalarriya\
\\uv Djnj, E, I, W\
\\ur Kdj= an-bundjak\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx buyhbuyika\
\\pr na-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de assorted, different kinds\
\\xv Na-buybuyika yi-bengka bimbom kareh nawu na-yahyungki.\
\\xe Maybe they painted different things, the old people.\
\
\\lx Buyhmi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan on the southern Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Buyhmi duwa Djawonj, Birndalak.\
\\xe The Buyhmi clan is fi:duwa moiety, and Birndalak [is a place in Buyhmi clan estate].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx buyika\
\\va biyika\
\\ps adj.\
\\de other, different one\
\\xv Ngal-dahdaluk, na-rangem na-buyika nani wanjh konemkuyeng nungka.\
\\xe That's a female, the male is different; he has a long neck.\
\
\\lx buyukme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de show, instruct\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bukkan\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx b\'farlebb\'farle\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de aunty\
\\uv E\
\\uv I, W, Djnj = berlu\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx B\'9crba\
\\va Birba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate, 'near Dordorrknokah'. Pronounced by other dialects as fv:Birba.\
(DK)\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx da-\
\\ps v. pref.\
\\de in the sun\
\\xv Ka-rrayo.\
\\xe It's lying in the sun.\
\\cf da-kurrme\
\\ce place out in the sun\
\\uv W\
\\uv I= larrhmikurrme, larrhme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dabarraba\
\\ps adv.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de yesterday, days previous\
\\pde wolewoleh\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dabbanmarra\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de sharp end of a fire drill\
\\xv Dabbanmarra yi-marnbun an-djarirri yi-yawan kun-darleh yi-burdebme.\
\\xe Make a sharp point on the fire stick drill, look for some fv:Premna acuminata shrub and make a fire drill and spin it.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dabbarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de partridge pigeon\
\\sc Geophaps smithii\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= rakul\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dabborrabbolk\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.old people, elders, 2.adults\
\\xv Birri-yolyolmeng dabborrabbolk nakka ben-nguneng berrewoneng and bene-nang birlmu\
nawu ka-bimdi.\
\\xe The old people told stories about how those two were eaten when they saw the barramundi like in the\
painting there.\
\\de 2. ancestors\
\\xv Ya kun-kare dabborrabbolk nawu bo-yak birrih-ni ya, birrih-bimbom la nanih\
birrih-kerrhkerrnge yo dabborrabbolk bininj.\
\\xe Yes, a very long time ago, the ancestors from the time when there was no water, yes they painted those,\
but these, these were from people who were more recent ancestors.\
\\cf dabbolk\
\\ce old person\
\\pdn kk= karrabolko\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dabberrk\
\\ps n.\
\\de feather, feather like crest and tail on the rainbow serpent\
\
\\lx dabbolk\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.old person 2. adult\
\
\\lx dabke\
\\va dabdabke\
\\ps v.t\
\\de Press in on, crowd around, surround\
\\xv \'91Oh barrk bolkki ngarduk kunj nga-rrabke\'92 ngarri-yime.\
\\xe 'Oh I'm going to close in that black wallaroo there, a kangaroo for me' we say.\
\\xv Bene-djalwam bu kun-red djarre bene-rrabkeng kumekke.\
\\xe They kept going to places far away in order to close in on him there.\
\
\\lx dabodabo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de The call of the spotted and large-tailed nightjars fv:lablab. Sometimes the call fv:dabodabo is used as a nickname for these two nightjars. The Australian owlet-nightjar is called fv:nadjik.\
\\sc Eurostopodus argus, Caprimulgus macrurus\
\\xv Dabodabo-dabodabo kayime kurrung-ken.\
\\xe The large-tailed and spotted nightjars make the call fv:dabodabo-dabodabo in the build-up season.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Dabu Karri\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Section of creek south of Kudjekbinj outstation, just upstream of Wuyhkabambuldi. Site name means literally \'91egg it-stands\'92. A site is manyawko djang \'91Eucalyptus tectifica Dreaming\'92. The focus of this djang is yellow ochre in the creek bank which is thrown into the water whilst calling out the names of places where one wishes to see an increase of manyawko, which are important for the production of honey by native bees.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx dabuberhbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hatch out from an egg.\
\\xv Djaddi dabuno ka-rrabuberhbun yiman karlkke.\
\\xe Tadpoles hatch out from frogs' eggs.\
\
\\lx dabukabun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de (of bird) sit on eggs.\
\
\\lx dabuno\
\\ps n.\
\\de egg, of any animal\
\\pdn kk= morrodjornno\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W =wirlarrk\
\\cf -dabungukdeng\
\\ce to lay eggs.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dad\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dadno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de leg/s\
\\xv Dadno ngardukki.\
\\xe The leg (of the goose) is mine.\
\\pdn kk= kun-karnkelh\
\
\\lx dadbakmeng\
\\ps n.\
\\de broken leg\
\
\\lx dadbe\
\\ps n.\
\\ge king.brown\
\\re king brown snake\
\\de King brown snake.\
\\sc Pseudechis australis\
\\pdn kk= darrmayal\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx dadbe\
\\ps n.\
\\ge paper.wasp\
\\re paper wasp\
\\re wasp, paper\
\\de paper wasp\
\\sc (family) Vespidae\
\\sy djakbarl\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx Dadbe Kani\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Open forest alongside a rocky outlier in the Djurlka estate. The site name means literally \'91western brown snake it-sits\'92. The site is on the plateau above the Djurlka waterfall. A creek runs north-northwest along the base of the outlier, and the site is around 2.5km upstream of the waterfall.  \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx dadbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de carry OBJ under a belt, such as knife or axe\
\
\\lx Daddubbe\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de fv:mimih spirit who has only one leg.\
\\xv Mimih na-ngarradjku, Dad-dubbe na-mardku.\
\\xe The fv:mimih spirits are of fv:na-ngarradjku moiety but fv:Daddubbe is fv:na-mardku moiety.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dadkalmurrng-kurrkurrbme\
\\cf see fv:kurrkurrbme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dadkalmurrngno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de thigh bone\
\
\\lx dadkanjno\
\\va kun-dadkanj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de leg muscles\
\
\\lx dadken\
\\ps n.\
\\re hafted stone axe\
\\de Stone axe with wooden haft.\
\\syn barndadken\
\\ee The literal meaning is \'91leg-of\'92 or \'91thigh-of\'92 which is derived from the practice of inserting the haft of the axe into a belt around the waist so that the axe was always hanging against the thigh.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 21/Feb/2015\
\
\\lx dad-kudji\
\\ps n.\
\\de leg amputee\
\
\\lx dad-kurrkurrbme\
\\cf see fv:kurrkurrbme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dadno\
\\va kun-dad\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1. leg 2. the area of a spear where the string binds the head to the shaft\
\\xv Kumekke kanjno kun-dad mey, kun-dad mey rey barrhburrinj konda yibarrhburrinj.\
\\xe He got a leg of meat, got it and went away and hid himself here along with the leg of meat.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dad-warlahmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de spread legs apart\
\\xv Wurdurd, ngurri-dad-warlahmen ngurri-burriwemen kanjdji.\
\\xe Children, spread your legs apart and throw (the ball) underneath.\
\
\\lx dad-yorrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de kick, push with the foot. Also the kicking action of kangaroos during fights.\
\
\\lx Dadjbaku\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan located in Kakadu National Park\
\\xv Bunidj mak birri-burrbuni en, nakka nawu Kakudju nawu birri-wokdi, njamed, ah Murumburr, birrih-bengkang, Djindibi, Dadjbaku birri-burrbuni nani Kunwinjku nawinjku konda Kunbarlanja Mengerrdji nakka birri-burrbom\
manekke fi:story.\
\\xe The Bunidj clan people knew that [story about the knob-tailed gecko dreaming] and the people who used to speak Gaagadju, and also\
whatsit, the Murumburr clan, they knew and the Djindibi clan, Dadjbaku clan, they knew and the people who spoke Kunwinjku here at Kunbarlanja, and also those such as the Mengerrdji language people, they all knew that story.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx dadjek\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grevillea.sp.\
\\re fi:Grevillea_pteridifolia\
\\sd plant\
\\de fern-leaved grevillea\
\\sc Grevillea pteridifolia\
\\xv An-dadjek an-lulumi.\
\\xe A fern-leaved grevillea which has fallen down in a big arc.\
\\uv I\
\\uv E (na-kerlk) =man-bongko, E (na-rayek) =man-wadbar\
\\ee D/Rem =wadbar\
\\sy Djnj= an-barnko\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx dadjke\
\\va -dadjdje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cut\
\\xv Kun-yarl ka-rradjke wanjh ka-warrhme.\
\\xe S/he'll cut the rope and it will fall down\
\\cf dadjmeng\
\\ce it's cut\
\\xv Birri-djalkdjalkmey kun-dad, kun-berl, kun-berl, kun-kodj kun-dume, birri-dadjkeng.\
\\xe They cut up the legs, the arms, the head, the back, they cut it all up.\
\\pdn kk= dilhke\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dadjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge cut\
\\re cut\
\\de be cut\
\\sn 2\
\\ge cease\
\\re cease\
\\re stop, cessation of a process or phenomena\
\\de cease, stop\
\\xv Man-djewk ka-rradjme wanjh karri-mang.\
\\xe When it stops raining we can get it.\
\\xv Bonj, ngerhdadjmeng.\
\\xe Finish, it's dead (stopped breathing).\
\\xv An-dak korroko ba-rradjmeng.\
\\xe The fi:Terminalia_carpentariae tree has already finished fruiting.\
\\pdv -dilhme\
\\dt 12/Nov/2007\
\
\\lx dadjmiken\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge muscular\
\\re muscular\
\\de muscular, well defined muscles\
\\xv Ngudda yi-dadjmiken.\
\\xe You're muscular.\
\\sy kukdadjmiken\
\\dt 31/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx dadjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de give\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =won\
\\xv Kan-dadjung bih!\
\\xe Give it to me!\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dahbo\
\\pr man\
\\ps n.\
\\de red coals of a fire\
\
\\lx dahkendi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sit, sleep or lie on or in something e.g. mat or blanket, canoe, inside a car.\
\\xv Blanket yi-dahkenwemen ba karri-dahkendi.\
\\xe Spread the blanket out so we can sit down on it.\
\\xv Wurdwurd birri-bimbom djabilarna na-kimukken dja djenj kah-dahkendi kanjdji dja yihkahwi nawu kukyahwurd djenj kah-dahkendi kore na-yahwurd djabilarna, namekbe djenj djurra.\
\\xe The children drew some big waterholes with big fish inside and some little waterholes with little fish inside, on paper.\
\\dt 24/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dahkendong\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place into a container\
\\xv Yi-bo-rrahkendo!\
\\xe Fill up the water (container).\
\\pdn kk= dahkenlorlme\
\
\\lx dahkenlorlme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place into a container\
\\xv Yi-djurlkkinj-dahkenlorlme!\
\\xn Yi-bo-rrahkendo!\
\\xe Fill up the water (container).\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dahkendong\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dahkenwarlhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spread out a swag, sheet or blanket on the ground\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dahkenwe\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dahkenwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spread out a swag, sheet or blanket on the ground\
\\pdn kk= dahkenwarlhke\
\
\\lx dahme/ -rrahme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de block an action, refuse permission, stop someone from doing something.\
\\xv Yimarnek kam-rayinj la Ngarridj bi-rrahmeng.\
\\xe She was going to come but Ngarridj wouldn't let her.\
\
\\lx dak\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de Pelvis, haunches, upper legs of macropods.\
\
\\lx dak\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Persoonia_falcata\
\\sd plant\
\\de milky plum tree\
\\sc Persoonia falcata\
\\ee fruit eaten late dry to mid wet season\
\\xv Man-balmed dja man-dak yi-rrong yi-marnbun yi-ngun karri-rawon.\
\\xe Pound the fi:Planchonella_arnhemica and the fi:Persoonia_falcata fruit together and you can eat it.\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx dakalhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de say, do\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde yime\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dakalhmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de become hard\
\\pde rayekmen\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dakbume\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge dive\
\\re dive down\
\\de Dive down into water when swimming (of humans or other animals, especially aquatic birds); lie down on stomach with head towards the water in order to drink.\
\\dt 27/Sept/2010\
\
\\lx Dakdjam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re place, upper Magela Creek\
\\de Regional place name, valley below Magela Falls on Magela Creek, in Arnhem Land.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Sept/2010\
\
\\lx Dakdjord\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in the Kunburray estate along a walking route particularly a hill and camping area by the Gumardir River in the Maburrinj estate, around 4km from where the Gumardir (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer) flows off the escarpment southeast of its confluence with the Goomadeer. \
\\xv Dakdjord an-barrarn manih arri-bidbuni arri-reyi Kunbarlanja korroko an-bolh. \
\\xe Dakdjord is a valley here where we went upstream a long time ago on the  walking route to Gunbalanya.\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx Dakkal\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan associated with the Rembarrnga and Dalabon languages\
\\xv Yo nungan kornkumo Dakkal. Yo Dakkal, nawu Bulanj bi-bornang, Kela? \
\\xe Yes, his father was a Dakkal clansman. Yes, Dakkal clan, that man of Bulanj subsection who was his father, Kela [tell me his name]!\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx Dakkayala\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kurulk clan estate.\
\
\\lx Dakku Kadudu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place near Barboryi, Kune country.\
\\xv Dakku Kadudu ka-bolkburnbun Barabba wanjh Warrayhngu.\
\\xe At Dakku Kadudu it's the border for Barabba and Warrayhngu clans\
\\uv E, D, Rem\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx dakme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place sheets of bark to form a dwelling?\
\\nt check meaning.\
\
\\lx Dakodje\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Large place name in fv:Djalama clan estate.\
\\xv Dakodje bolk-djalama ngey-badjan.\
\\xe fv:Dakodje is a large regional name in fv:Djalama clan estate.\
\
\\lx dakurrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place out in the sun\
\\uv W\
\\uv I =larrhmikurrme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Dalabon\
\\va Dhalabon\
\\ph 'dh' in above variant form in an interdental which is not a regular part of the Bininj Kunwok phonemic inventory\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge Dalabon\
\\re langauge name\
\\de name of a language spoken in area south of Bininj Kunwok and usually referred to as fv:Dangbon in Bininj Kunwok\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx dalehbonghmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de the drying out of plant matter, the transformation of plants from green to dead brown.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dalehmen\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dalehmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de the drying out of plant matter, the transformation of plants from green to dead brown.\
\\xv Man-bedje ka-bardbakme wanjh ka-rralehmen.\
\\xe The spear grass will fall down and then dry out.\
\\pdn kk= 1.murrangamen, 2. dalehbonghme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dalehno\
\\ps n.\
\\de dried plant matter.\
\
\\lx dalhbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de step on, tread, stomp\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde melme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dalk\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dalkno\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\de grass\
\\xv karndakidj, ngaleng Yingarna ngal-badjan kabi-munkewe ka-re ka-ngun kun-dalk.\
\\xe Yingarna who is the mother of the Antilopine kangaroo, sends him out (the kangaroo) and he goes and\
eats grass.\
\\pdn kk= kun-djanud\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dalkbang\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\va an-darlkbang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\sn 1\
\\re spinifex sp.\
\\de kind of sandstone country spinifex similar to fv:(m)an-karrarndalk\
\\sc unidentified\
\\sn 2\
\\re grasses which are poisonous or sharp to touch or move through\
\\de grasses which are poisonous or sharp to touch or move through\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 26/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx an-dalkbanj\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Carissa_lanceolata\
\\de Conkerberry; a small spreading prickly shrub or small tree to 3 m high, spines to 17 mm long. Grows in Eaten when ripe, dark purple to black. Fruit is very sweet and sometimes produced in large numbers. Habitat: sandstone jungle, sandstone woodland. Fruits are ovoid to globose fleshy berries, approximately 6-13 mm long x 5-10 mm diameter, purple-black when ripe; 1-2 seeded. \
\\sc Carissa lanceolata\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 24/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dalkdadjdje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cut grass\
\\xv Karri-dalk-dadjdje.\
\\xe Let's cut the grass.\
\
\\lx Dalkdedj (Dhalkdedj)\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate near Kumbe\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dalkken\
\\ps n.\
\\re dingo\
\\re Canis lupus dingo\
\\de Dingo.\
\\lit (kun-) dalk-ken, 'from the grass'.\
\\sc Canis lupus dingo\
\\sy nagarndegen\
\\pdn kk= djarnudken (E), njunjung (W)\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 02/Sept/2014\
\
\\lx dalkkedalkken\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge fairy.wren\
\\re red-backed fairy wren\
\\re fi:Melurus_melanocephalus\
\\de red-backed fairy wren\
\\sc Melurus melanocephalus\
\\sn 2\
\\ge fairy.wren\
\\re fi:Malurus_lamberti\
\\re variegated fairy wren\
\\de Variegated fairy wren.\
\\sc Melurus lamberti\
\\lit 'belonging to grass'\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx dangnud\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Tree with sweet black fruit in monsoon vine forest\
\\sc Pouteria sericea.\
\
\\lx dalohme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be slack\
\\re slacken\
\\de be loose or slack, be loose fitting\
\\xv Djalawarra ka-rralohme ngun-dedjbawon.\
\\xe The trousers are slack and slipping off your bum.\
\\xv Borlorl yi-wernhdjabnamen ba marrek ka-rralohme.\
\\xe Stand the post up properly so it doesn't wobble around.\
\\dt 28/May/2006\
\
\\lx daluk\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.woman\
\\de 2. wife\
\\xv Daluk ka-karrme.\
\\xe He's married.\
\\cf daluhdaluk\
\\ce women\
\\sy molehmolenj\
\\pdn kk= 1.kardukardu 2. ngal-djubdjubken\
\\ee Dalabon =k\'fard\'fak\'fard.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx daluk\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de female\
\\xv Ngale karndayh, ngal-daluk.\
\\xe That's a female Antilopine kangaroo.\
\
\\lx dalukorro\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de dry cooler wind which blows from the east or south-east at the start of the dry season\
\\dt 04/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx dalwanino\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps\
\\mr [kun-]dalwani-no\
\\ge ceremonial camp\
\\re ceremony campsite\
\\de massed public camp for the Kunabibi ceremony\
\\ee The public camp for the Kunabibi ceremony is the domestic support camp for rituals which take place in secret at a nearby location. Women and children are based here and some men and youths who are participating in the rituals will move back and forward between the secret men's camp and the public camp. Other youths and young men will stay inside the secret camp for the duration of the ceremony and will not come out to the fv:dalwanino until the end of the ceremony. This latter group are referred to as fv:warehware and can not be seen by women and uninitiated men until the end of the ceremony. In modern times, vehicles entering the fv:dalwanino can only be driven by people of the fv:yirridjdja moiety as this is the manager or fv:djungkay moiety for this ceremony.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Damdam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de small billabong in fv:Dankorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx dame\
\\ps neg. part.\
\\ge not\
\\re not\
\\de not\
\\xv Dame yi-mayi yi-wakwam.\
\\xe You didn't get it, you left it behind.\
\\xv Ngudda dame yi-marrkmang yi-balyimeng ngudda Ngabba!\
\\xe Dad, you said you didn't believe him!\
\\uv E, Kdj\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx damed\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lily.paste\
\\re lily seed paste\
\\re paste made from lily seed\
\\de paste made from <Nymphaea> lily seeds\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx dan\
\\ps n.\
\\ge freshwater.mangrove\
\\re freshwater mangrove\
\\de freshwater mangrove\
\\xv Dan ngun-mey baleh yih-di. \
\\xe The freshwater mangravoe has taken hold of you (and caused you to become lost), where have you been?\
\\sy man-karlnganj\
\\sc Barringtonia acutangula\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= an-kalngki\
\\pdn man-kolh\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dan\
\\ps n.\
\\ge stink.bug\
\\re stink bug\
\\de stink bug\
\\xv Dan, bu yi-ngingerrehme ka-banj.\
\\xe If you squash a stink bug it gives off an odour.\
\\sc (family) Pentatomidae\
\\sd insects\
\
\\lx danbarrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de pierce through the body and come out the other side.\
\\xv Nganabbarru birri-rrulubom wanjh danbarrmeng burribebmeng mimno.\
\\xe They shot the buffalo and the bullet went right through the other side of the body.\
\
\\lx dandi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de open legs\
\\xv Nakka kunj yi-na ka-rrandi.\
\\xe Look at that kangaroo with its legs spread out.\
\
\\lx Danek\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan to the north of the Arnhem Land plateau \
\\xv Kubomerlem kumekke ka-djobme Warddjak. Ngalengman beh Danek. Danek wanjh ka-yimerran. Kukalak manu.\
\\xe The place Kubomerlem is where the Warddjak clan finishes. Then further on its Danek. It becomes Danek land then. That is Kukalak [a regional estate name].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx danek\
\\pr man-\
\\va man-djanek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Typhonium_sp.\
\\re Arum plant\
\\de Kind of herbaceous plant of the Arum family (as are fi:Amorphophallus_spp.) with a subterranean corm which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is rendered edible. The leaves and stem are removed and the corm roasted in hot coals. It is then pounded with a stone for a long time to get the juice out, washed with water and pounded again. The corm pulp must turn from white to a black colour before it is edible. Arum plants belong to the fv:yarriburrik matry which has fire as its totemic emblem, most likely because fire is involved in the preparation of the tubers.\
\\xv Kuwardde kaddum minj bu wernhdjarre darnki, ngarri-bidbom kumekke ngarri-yoy man-danek ngarri-doy.\
\\xe Up in the rocks not up high but close [to the ground], we climbed up and there we camped and pounded fi:Typhonium corms.\
\\so Thomson Yuludjiri talking about Dilkbany at Lanka in Alarrdju country.\
\\ee There is considerable variation in shape and size of Arum plants and as a result, different sizes of the same species may have different names.\
\\sc Typhonium cochlear, Typhonium flagelliforme, Typhonium russell-smithii\
\\sy kubulurr, \
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\ur Djnj= an-djanek\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
  \
\\lx danngarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Frilled-necked Lizard\
\\sc Chlamydosaurus kingii\
\\pdn kk= marrawawa\
\\en duwa\
\\uv Kune =nalangak\
\\ee REM =djangkurr\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Danngarrkadi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de billabong west of Mumeka, good fishing\
\\lit "frilled-neck lizard place"\
\\en duwa, bolk-kurulk\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dang\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dangno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge mouth\
\\re mouth\
\\de mouth (human or animal), beak of bird\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 2\
\\de opening, door.\
\\cf Yi-rrangbalhmen!\
\\ce Close the door!\
\\sn 3\
\\pr man-\
\\re distal end of didjeridu\
\\de distal end of a didjeridu\
\\xv Mani man-dangkimuk man-melkmakkayken.\
\\xe This one [didjeridu] has a wide mouth at the distal end and it has an excellent tone.\
\\sd music\
\\pdn kun-djangara\
\\dt 21/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx dang\
\\pr man-\
\\va dangno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de lengths of string decorated with feathers worn as a headdress for Lorrkkon ceremony. The fv:dangno\
is sent out with a messenger to other groups so they will come to the Lorrkkon ceremony.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dangbakke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.break back the head of a fish in order to insert it onto a stick so as to carry it. 2. An idiom meaning to obtain a large sum of money.\
\\xv Balang bimbom dolobbo, dangbakkeng nungka.\
\\xe Balang painted a bark painting and really got a lot of money for it.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dangbalhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de close an opening or door\
\\xv Makka wanjh mimih kumekke kah-di. Ya maneh bu ka-re wanjh bininj kabi-mang and\
ka-yidangbalhme.\
\\xe That's where mimih live. That's where if somebody goes there(the mimih) gets him and closes the\
entrance (to a cave) with him.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dangbalhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de close a door or window or opening\
\
\\lx dangbalhmiken\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de able to be closed up, lockable.\
\
\\lx dangbalhmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de walk around with mouth shut\
\
\\lx dangbarli\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.foreign person, a stranger who speaks a different language. 2. crooked-mouthed\
\
\\lx dangbarung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de ritual rubbing of underarm smell on the mouth of a person in a silence relationship. The ritual lifts the\
restriction.\
\\xv Ngun-dangbarung, yi-won kun-madj wanjh ngune-wokdi.\
\\xe He will cover your mouth with underarm smell, you'll give him sheets and blankets and then you can\
talk together.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dangbarrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de mouth open\
\\xv Na-manjwarre ka-bidbun man-berrk ka-djal-ni ka-rrangbarrme.\
\\xe The crocodile will climb up out into the open and just sit there with its mouth open.\
\
\\lx Dangbon\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\mr dang 'mouth' bon 'to go [in Dalabon language]'\
\\ge Dangbon\
\\re language name\
\\de name of the northern dialect of Dalabon, once spoken at Korlobidahdah on the Cadell River but in 2007 is considered moribund, if not\
extinct\
\\xv Nakka ku-wardde kah-nan kabarri-yime Dangbon, yilinkirrkkirr 'manjh kunjno' ba-yimi. Kabi-marneyime o kunj nuye\
kabi-marneyime Dangbon, yo yilinkirrkkirr.\
\\xe It looks around in the rocks and in Dangbon it is called fv:yilinkirrkkirr [sandstone shrike thrush] and in Dangbon they say [in\
Dangbon language] 'the kangaroo's bird' and in Dangbon it's called yilinkirrkkirr.\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\so LBN\
\\sy Dalabon\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx dangbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de stop eg. the car\
\\xv Yi-rrangbu muddika.\
\\xe Stop the car.\
\
\\lx dangburddjikaberrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ng see fv:kundangburddjikaberrk\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dangdang\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bloodwood.sp\
\\re rough-leafed bloodwood\
\\re fi:Corymbia_setosa\
\\de Rough leafed bloodwood; flowers may be white, pink or red, used for making didjeridus or fv:mako\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_setosa\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dangdulme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de knock on a door\
\
\\lx dangdjawurrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de whiskers, facial hair\
\\sy kun-djawurrk.\
\
\\lx dangen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge stand\
\\re stand\
\\de become standing, reach a standing position, come to a standstill\
\\ng As Evans 2003: 379 notes, this verb stem is one of two alternatives for the verb 'to stand' (fv:-di, and fv:-dangen) with fv:-dangen having inceptive meanings along the lines of 'assume standing position'. The verbal paradigm is: IMP dangimen, NP dangen, PP\
danginj PI dangeni, IRR dangemeninj, RR(NP) dangerren, RR(PP) dangerrinj, RR(PI) dangerreni\
\\xv Bene-burriweyi madjawarr durndengi djabdangeni kore bene-danginj.\
\\xe The two fo them were throwing spears, but the spears were bouncing back and coming to stand upright in the ground where the two of\
them were standing.\
\\xv Ngarri-danginj wanjh ngarri-koluy.\
\\xe We stopped and got down (from the truck).\
\\xv Hat ngan-marneruy nga-djalohdanginj yiwarrudj.\
\\xe My hat got burnt [by the uncontrollable bushfire] and I just came to a standstill and started praying to God.\
\\so Example 1 is from Evans 2003:379, (9.115)\
\\bb Evans 2003:379\
\\sn 2\
\\re come to live in a place\
\\de come to live in a place\
\\xv Bu korroko nga-rranginj, bu mandjewk mandjewk nga-djaldi munguyh.\
\\xe I came here to live a long time ago, for many years and I'll stay here always.\
\\so Margaret from Manmoyi in Gerhalter translation\
\\sn 3\
\\re sibling, be in relationship of\
\\de Be siblings.\
\\ng Note that this sense is only represented by the past perfective form fv:-danginj or the collective sense of the reflexive fv:-dangerrinj.\
\\xv Dja nawu birri-dangerrinj nakka kukarre kure kabirri-dadjkerren. \
\\xe As for those who are a group of siblings, they [sisters of boys] will cut themselves on the lower leg [when a brother undergoes a circumcision ceremony].\
\\xv Bene-danginj nanih. Na-wernwarre dukkang. Na-walawalak kuberrk di.\
\\xe This is [a bark painting of] two brothers. The elder one tied it up [the crocodile in the water]. The younger one stood up on the bank [out of the water].\
\\sn 4\
\\re born\
\\de was born\
\\ng this idiomatic sense being a semantic extention of the verb to stand is also only represented by the past perfective form fv:-danginj\
\\xv Belinj ba-rranginj Mokkokarlbam, ngal-Bolmo.\
\\xe Belinj, that woman of the Bolmo clan was born at Mokkokarlbam.\
\\sy -dolkan\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx danghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de make apical click (with tongue against palate).\
\
\\lx danginj\
\\ps deverbalised noun\
\\de siblings\
\\lit were born\
\\xv ngane-danginj\
\\xe We are siblings\
\\xv Birri-danginj\
\\xe They are all siblings.\
\\cf dangen\
\
\\lx dangkerlk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de small mother of pearl shell\
\
\\lx dangmad, dangmadno\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de chin.\
\
\\lx dangmarrhmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de open (eg. door, lid, window etc.)\
\
\\lx dangmarrhmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de move along with open mouth or opening in feature moving.\
\
\\lx dangnud\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re Pouteria sericia\
\\de small to medium sized tree (3-10m) with edible black fruit\
\\sc Pouteria sericia\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj, W, I\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx dangrayek\
\\ps n./adj.\
\\de strict person, strict, one who can speak strongly\
\
\\lx dangrurrk\
\\pr ka\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\de open entrance, open door.\
\
\\lx dangrurrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de oral cavity, inside of mouth.\
\
\\lx dangwel\
\\va dangwelno\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de lips\
\\xv Dangwel-burlurlhmeng.\
\\xe His lip has swollen up.\
\
\\lx dangwok\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dangwokno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clan.interj.\
\\re clan interjection\
\\de System of interjections and patrilect terms which are associated with an individual patriclan and index membership in a particular clan or acknowledge that the speaker is on a site belonging to the clan with which the special clan interjection is associated.\
\\xv Duh karri-raray.\
\\xe Duh let's go [duh= Balngarra clan fv:kun-dangwok].\
\\xv Kandi-wo man-me ngamedngamed nga-marrwedowen.\
\\xe Give me some food ngamedngamed I'm hungry [ngamedngamed= Burlalhdja clan fv:kun-dangwok].\
\\xv Karri-kadji-re karri-kadji-djangkan.\
\\xe Let's kadji go, let's kadji go hunting [kadji= Darnkolo clan fv:kun-dangwok].\
\\xv Yi-njarrakinjemen.\
\\xe Cook it "njarra"! [njarra= Djordi clan fv:kun-dangwok]!\
\
\\lx dangyohmi\
\\pr kun-\
\\cf see fv:kundangyohmi\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx danj\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ge barbed.spear\
\\re spear type, with barbs\
\\de Spear with three-uniserially barbed prongs fitted to a shaft so that each set of barbs is at right angles to the others.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 06/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx danjbik\
\\ps adj.\
\\de three\
\\uv W\
\\uv I= djarrkno na-kudji.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx danjbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de kill, spear, especially with a multi-pronged 'fish wire' spear.\
\
\\lx darl\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.sp.\
\\re broad-leaved paperbark\
\\re paperbark sp.\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_viridiflora\
\\de a small, erect or straggly tree, 3-10 metres high,, also known as broad-leaved paperbark or broad-leaved tea-tree, grows along streams,\
in swampy areas and often in dense stands in open woodlands where the land may be seasonally flooded\
\\xv Yoh njamed ngarri-yime nabowirlih, jad an-kod na ka-kobun. Djal an-darl ka-rohrok jemwe an-darl. Makka an-darl.\
\\xe Yes, whatsit, we call the paperbark flowers fv:nabowirlih, those flowers of paperbark trees. The same applies to fi:Melaleuca_viridiflora.\
This fi:Melaleuca_viridiflora here.\
\\sc Melaleuca viridiflora\
\\sy (m)an-darlbborrongko\
\\sd plant\
\\uv I, Kdj, E, Djnj, W.\
\\dt 26/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx darlbborrongko\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.sp.\
\\re Melaleuca_viridiflora (alternative name)\
\\re paperbark tree species\
\\de Kundedjnjenghmi synonym for broad-leaved paperbark\
\\xv Ka-rohrok an-darl arri-yime an-darl makkan kobom an-darlbborrongko. \
\\xe Same like fi:Melaleuca_viridiflora which we call fv:an-darl that one flowering [there] but we have an alternative name for it\
fv:an-darlbborrongko.\
\\sd plant\
\\so LBN\
\\sc Melaleuca viridiflora\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I, E, W= man-darl\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx darle\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de dry grass or dry plant matter of any kind, a dead tree\
\\cf v.i. fv:-darlehme, to dry out (of plants).\
\
\\lx darleh\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de 1. firestick drill\
\\de 2. any plant which can be used to make a firestick drill\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx darlehno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de dried plant matter\
\\cf -darlehmen\
\\ce (v.i.) to dry out (of plants)\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\lx darlkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de to float\
\\xv Baladjdji nang kahdarlkan manbu manme dahkedahkendi mankinjdjek.\
\\xe He saw the dillybag, which had been filled with cheeky yams, floating [empty] in the water.\
\\xv Modjarrki ka-rrarlkan.\
\\xe The freshwater crocodile is floating on the surface of the water.\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 190\
\\id DK, MG (second xv 02/Aug/2016)\
\\dt 30/Jul/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx darnh-\
\\ps v. pref.\
\\ge closely\
\\re closely\
\\de Close up, closely.\
\\xv Karri-darnhnan.\
\\xe Let's have a close look at it.\
\\xv Komdarnhdi namekke ngarrih-nan.\
\\xe We see the neck closely (the implication is that the neck is easy to identify in the figure discussed).\
\\xv Wanjh kumeke bene-darnhnang milhkurrmerrinj bene-mudyarlarrmeng.\
\\xe Well they saw (the buffalo) right in front of them putting its head down to charge and their hair stood on end.\
\\dt 24/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx darnkih\
\\ps adv.\
\\ge close\
\\re close\
\\de Close, close up, nearly.\
\\xv murrb murrb lublub lublub ka-yime yi-bekkan ka-wokdi: wanjh yi-binbidbiren [???] ka-wake yurrkku yi-kayikan wanjh ngun-yunghke kumekke lublub murrd murrd yime kam-re wanjh kamdjale darnkih dow yi-bun yi-darnhbun.\
\\xe They (emus) make a sound 'murrb murrb lublub lublub' and you can hear them and you can reply with the same sound and it will come wandering up to you and when it gets close you keep making the sound 'lublub murrd murrd' and then when it gets very close bang, you can shoot it from close up.\
\
\\lx Darnkolo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Kuninjku patriclan from the Tomkinson and lower Mann Rivers district.\
\\xv Yiman kayime Mukkamukka, Kubarrakahbul, ... yi-bekka kadjale Dorddjam, Kukarddak, Nganbelk, kadjale ngamed Mikalkborloh, Kornobolo Kawanjkerri, Miwurlkwurlk, kadjale Midjuyh kaddum Burddjinnguk, Miwakkawilk, Bobuneyi, koyek kadjale Bulubbulu, Kukalal, Walmidji, kadjale Kubarrakahbul manekke barrim-raworrinj anbu na-rrarnkolo ngamed konda, Mukkamukka, Nangalakardbam, manekke na-Marrirn.\
\\xe Like Mukkamukka, Kubarrakabbul ... it goes on to Dorddjam, Kukarddak, Nganbelk, further to whatsit Mikalkborloh, Kornobolo Kawanjkerri, Miwurlkwurlk, further to Midjuyh up to Burddjinnguk, Miwakkawilk, Bobuneyi, east further to Bulubbulu, Kukalal, Walmidji, then to Kubarrakahbul. That\'92s where they join together with the Darnkolo and here at Mukkamukka and Nangalakardbam,\
they are Marrirn sites.\
\\ee the fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name equivalent for the Darnkolo clan is fv:Burinmarr\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx darake\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rainbowfish\
\\re rainbow fish (various)\
\\re fi:Melanotaenia spp. (rainbow fish)\
\\de Banded rainbowfish, mauve rainbowfish, Black-banded jewelfish, Red-tailed rainbowfish\
\\sc Melanotaenia trifasciata, Melanotaenia nigrans, Melanotaenia spledida australis\
\\sy dilebang\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 24/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx darok\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de language\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-wok\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx darokdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de talk, speak\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde wokdi\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx darrahmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge rip\
\\re rip, tear\
\\de Tear or rip something e.g. paperbark, paper, textile\
\\xv Man-burrba kan-marnedarrahmang.\
\\xe Rip some [loin] cloth for me.\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx darrarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge goanna\
\\re black-headed goanna\
\\re fi:Varanus_tristis\
\\de Black-headed goanna.\
\\xv Darrarra yiman bikku la na-buyika.\
\\xe fv:Darrarra is like fv:bikku but different.\
\\xv Darrarra kom-red one, yiman burarr but man-berrk.\
\\xv The fv:darrarra has a dark neck, is like Merten's Water Goanna but lives in the open (ie. not in the water).\
\\sc Varanus tristis\
\\uv E\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 25/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx darrayhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re gut kangaroo\
\\de Remove internal organs of a kangaroo in preparation to cook it.\
\\uv E\
\\dt 06/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx darre\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge clan.interj\
\\re clan lect interjection for Maddalk clan\
\\de fv:kun-dangwok clan interjection used by the Maddalk clan associated with the east Alligator River.\
\\xe Darre arri-re, marrek ngurri-kodjnjirrhme!\
\\xv We are walking along here fv:darre, don't get upset with us [addressing the spirits of deceased residents].\
\
\\lx darrebulke\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge eucalypt.sp.\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_herbertiana\
\\de kind of Eucalyptus tree\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Eucalyptus herbertiana\
\\dt 26/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx darrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de poke out\
\\xv Kalawan ka-keb-darrhme kumidjno.\
\\xe The goanna's nose is poking out of the burrow.\
\
\\lx darrinj\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps adj.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge non-secret\
\\re public\
\\re non-restricted\
\\re non-secret\
\\de in the public domain, non-secret knowledge or a place which is open to general\
public access\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Na-rrarrinj bonj ka-mak daluk kabarri-wokbekkan.\
\\xe That's non-secret [language], women are allowed to hear those words.\
\\xv A: Morrdjdjanjno ka-karrme Wubarr, nga-bengkan. Andjamun. Nakudji\
morrdjdjanjno na-rrarrinj daluk kabirri-bekkan. B:  An-darrinj makka,\
mak an-buyika nga-kalalameng an-djamun manu Wubarr.\
\\xe A: The Ubarr ceremony has fi:morrdjdjanjno songs, I know them. They are secret.\
Only the public fi:morrdjdjanjno songs can be heard by women. B: They are in the\
public domain, but those other special songs I just sang are from the Ubarr\
ceremony and are secret.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so\
\\an djamun, na-djamun\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv Djnj, E, W\
\\ur I= -yarlang\
\\dt 13/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx darrkarrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sn 1\
\\de Tread, stomp.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Men\'92s 'mimih style\'92 dancing involving stomping of one foot.\
\\pde melme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx darrkdarrk\
\\ps adj.\
\\de rough texture, 'like a wood rasp'\
\\xv Bulurr bodme-darrkdarrk.\
\\xe The fv:bulurr lizard has a back like a wood rasp.\
\
\\lx darrkid\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge alive\
\\re alive\
\\de alive \
\\xv Nungka ka-rrarrkid.\
\\xe He is alive.\
\\xv Ngarri-bokkadjuy nganabbarru wanjh ngarri-bebmeng kure darrkid ngarri-nang.\
\\xe We followed the buffalo tracks until we arrived and actually saw it (the buffalo).\
\\sn 2\
\\ge actual\
\\re actual, real\
\\de Actual, in person.\
\\xv Nahni kun-madj nuye la darrkidno kare baleh wam.\
\\xe Here is his bag but I wonder where he actually is.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx darrkidno\
\\ps n.\
\\de actual part, the live part, the edible part\
\
\\lx darrkid-yame\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spear actual live game\
\
\\lx darrmayal\
\\ps n.\
\\ge king.brown\
\\re king brown snake\
\\re fi:Pseudechis_australis\
\\de king brown snake\
\\sc fi:Pseudechis_australis\
\\syn nadjakkorrongko\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dadbe\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx darrme\
\\ps loc. adv.\
\\ge near\
\\re near, next to\
\\re next to\
\\de Near to, next to, in the vicinity of.\
\\xv Konda bu ngamed darrme, Mimarn ka-re bu mane ka-re kure kulabbarl ngamed kune,\
Bidbakmeng.\
\\xe Here neat by what's that place, Mimarn which goes on to that billabong at Bidbakmeng.\
\\xv Ngamed darrme nga-bawong.\
\\xe I left it next to whatsit [place eg. near the creek or in the car]\
\\xv Ku-kabo darrme.\
\\xe Down near the creek somewhere.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx darrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ng attested only in fv:mim-darrme 'popeyed'\
\\de Make 'popeyes'.\
\\xv Nungka ngan-marnemimdarrmeng.\
\\xe He made a funny face (big eye) at me.\
\
\\lx dawh\
\\ps adj.\
\\de 1. amputated, the end part remaining\
\\xv Dad-dawh.\
\\xe (Person with) one leg.\
\\xv Bid-dawh.\
\\xe Finger chopped off.\
\\de 2. half-smoked cigarette\
\\xv Kano dawh.\
\\xe Give me the half smoked cigarette.\
\\de 3. An action cut short.\
\\xv Nani yi-na djekmeng dawh.\
\\xe Look at him laughing until he can't anymore.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx dawird\
\\va dadawird\
\\ps ideoph.\
\\de the sound that fv:Namorrorddo makes as he moves across the sky.\
\
\\lx dawk\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp\
\\re fi:Curcumis_melo\
\\re bush cucumber\
\\de Bush cucumber vine with an edible fruit available in the wet season; annual climbing or trailing herb with simple tendrils.\
\\sc Curcumis melo\
\\xv Ngale ngal-bengwarr ngalu kurdukadji, kun-mabu warridj ka-ngun.  Manekke ngalengarre man-djalke manu ngad Bininj karri-ngun warridj, kan-djenbun and man-dawk warridj,  yibengkan man-dawk man-yahwurd, manekke\
ka-ngun.\
\\xe She is completely crazy the emu, she even eats charcoal. And fi:Ampelocissus_acetosa that berry that people also eat, but it burns your tongue and also small bush cucumbers fi:Cucumis_melo, you know those little things, she eats those.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 30/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx daworro\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de clan\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =kun-nguya\
\\ee D =daworro\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dayadayarrhken\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de pandanus grove\
\\xv Kodjok Bamdjelk ka-berd-welhwelhme dayadayarrhken.\
\\xe Kodjok Bamdjelk (mythical being) spins his penes around in the pandanus groves.\
\
\\lx dayarr\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de pandanus\
\\sc Pandanus spiralis\
\\pdn kk= kun-yaril\
\\uv E= man-dayarr, Kdj= kun-yakngarra, W= man-belk\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx daybun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge agree.to.go\
\\re agree to go\
\\de decide to go somewhere, say yes to a proposition regarding travel\
\\xv Kamarrang kamhre? Yoh, korroko daybom.\
\\xe Is Kamarrang coming? Yes, he's agreed to come.\
\\cf marne-daybun\
\\ce agree to travel with someone\
\\uv I\
\\ur W, Kdj= -mahme\
\\dt 03/Jul/2011\
\
\\lx dayhdayh\
\\ps n.\
\\re northern hopping-mouse\
\\re hopping-mouse\
\\re fi:Notomys_aquilo\
\\de Northern hopping-mouse.\
\\sc Notomys aquilo\
\\xv Kidjikidjidayhdayh kidjikidjidayhdayh kabarri-yime.\
\\xe They say 'kidjikidjidayhdayh kidjikidjidayhdayh.'\
\\uv Djnj\
\\xv Dayhdayh ka-worrowkworrowkme, kukakno ka-bebme wanjh kumurrng ka-ngimen kururrk ku-kurlk redno nuye.\
\\xe The northern hopping-mouse jumps around, comes out at night and goes back into its hole in the ground early in the morning.\
\\uv E\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 22/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx dayhmornmorndi\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Corms of |fi\{Eliocharis dulcis\}\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-kurladj\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx daykan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be circumcised\
\\xv Ka-rraykan.\
\\xe He's circumcised.\
\\xv Nakka yi-bengkan marrek bandi-berddadjkemeninj, nanih barri-wam.\
Minj ka-rraykan larrk, djabinj.\
\\xe That there (two men, the Nakorrkko), they had not been circumcised, they went like\
this (points to rock art painting of uncircumcised man). They were not circumcised,\
they were uncircumcised.\
\\xv Djabinj bani-reyi, nani bani-daykani karrkad, nawu kodjbangko Bulanj,\
Kodjok bani-reyi. \
\\xe Those two (the Nakorrkko) they were (at first) uncircumcised and they were\
circumcised when they went up to the plateau, those two wild men Bulanj and\
Kodjok were travelling.\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx dayken\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kidney\
\\re kidney\
\\de Kidneys.\
\\xv Kare odjbel kun-dayken nuye kabirri-nan.\
\\xe He is going to the hospital and they will look at his kidneys.\
\\uv W\
\\sy kun-debad\
\\ur I= derbadno, kun-derbad\
\\sd body parts\
\\dt 24/May/2013\
\
\\lx Daymikaldja (Dhaymikaldja)\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate, sometimes visited for flying fox\
\\uv E, D\
\\uv I =Demalkaldja\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dayno\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.sphere, round object\
\\de 2. round fruit\
\\cf mim-dayno\
\\ce eye-ball\
\\xv Yi-mim-day-kimuk.\
\\xe You big eye-ball (insult).\
\\cf ka-rraykan\
\\ce circumcised\
\
\\lx dayo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lie in the sun\
\\uv W\
\\cf dakurrme\
\\ce place in the sun\
\
\\lx dedded\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\ge lorikeet\
\\re red-collared lorikeet\
\\de Red-collared lorikeet. Affiliated with fv:duwa moiety.\
\\sc Trichoglossus rubritorquis\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx dedj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dedjno, man-dedj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1. bum, buttocks\
\\de 2. base of an object.\
\
\\lx dedj\
\\pr man-\
\\va dedjno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de the base of a tree trunk or plant\
\\xv Ku-rredj nga-rrudji.\
\\xe I buried it at the base (of the tree).\
\
\\lx dedjbang\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Vitex_acuminata\
\\de kind of tree (7-15m) with edible purple-black fruit\
\\sc Vitex acuminata\
\\sy (m)an-balinjdja\
\\sd plant\
\\uv E, I, Djnj, Dalabon= dedjbang\
\\dt 30/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx dedjbarndi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge sit.high\
\\re sit high up\
\\de Sit up high, eg. on a chair, be perched up high.\
\\xv Konda nga-rredjbarndi.\
\\xe I'll sit up here [on this high chair].\
\
\\lx dedjbirrkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge poke.bum\
\\re poke in the bum with finger\
\\de Poke OBJ's bottom with finger.\
\
\\lx dedjbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de poke one's bum out\
\\xv Borrkkeng nanih, dad-wayhkeng, berl-rolkang, dedj-bonghmeng, wanjh ngarri-djekmeng ngarri-doweng!\
\\xe He danced and lifted up his legs, waved his arms around and stuck his bum out, and we laughed until it hurt!\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dedjbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cut open the guts of a kangaroo during cooking\
\\xv Nangahnang dedjbom rowk malkno, nguneng, rdurdduno, derbadno, derbadno, nguneng bonj la wanjh kurrmeng la wam.\
\\xe He watched and cut up the whole kangaroo, he ate the liver, the heart, kidneys, he ate the lot and then put the rest down and went off.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dedjdabke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de block OBJ's guts/digestive tract due to gluttony. Not in polite usage.\
\\lit 'bum-blocked'.\
\
\\lx dedjdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be located in the ground, used mostly of yams and tubers\
\\xv Karrbarda kah-dedjdi kure Namungun.\
\\xe There are yams there at Namungun (place name).\
\
\\lx dedjdong\
\\va dedjdjong\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Have sex, fuck.\
\\xv Kabene-dedjdorren.\
\\xe They're having sex.\
\
\\lx dedjdubbedurndeng\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge dead.end\
\\re dead end (of stream branch)\
\\de Dead-end section of a stream, attached to the main watercourse as an appendix shape.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 01/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx dedjdukkarren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de tie a naga (ceremonial loincloth) on oneself.\
\
\\lx dedjdjinhdjinh\
\\ps n.\
\\re saw-shelled turtle\
\\re fi:Myuchelys_latersternum\
\\de Saw-shelled turtle. These tiny little turtles are associated with fv:ngalyod the rainbow serpent and their saw-edged shells are believed to be able to drill down into the rock where fv:ngalyod lives in her subterranean burrow.\
\\sy bamrdek\
\\sc Myuchelys latersternum\
\\sd reptiles\
\\dt 17/Aug/2014\
\
\\lx dedjdjordobowkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de upside down,standing on head\
\
\\lx dedjdjorlok\
\\ps n.\
\\de 'big hole' (ie. greedy person, a word not in polite usage).\
\
\\lx dedjdjudme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge poke.bum\
\\re poke the buttocks or rump of OBJ\
\\de jab or prod the buttocks or rump of an OBJ. especially with a sharp object\
\\xv Nawu karndakidj an-kole an-kodjdjekurrmi wardi bu baladjabdiwirrinj bu bangmeyurrhkuyuwirrinj, kun-kange ba-kange... ba-bangniwirrinj kunj. Dja arri-kolekurrmi an-wurrk arri-nami ya arri-kolekurrmi kanjdji borndok an-kole ku-kurlk balayoy bu an-wurrk arri-yikani wardi anbu ba-djabdiwirrinj an-kole ngarri-kurrmeninj ba-kangedarrmeninj yirridjdja nawu bininj nakka, nungka kunj ka-bengkan rowk ba-kangebabanghni 'O ka-kangebabang maitbi Bininj kabarri-re' ba-yimi barri-nami. An-kole arri-kurrmi bu arri-yoy malahmalaywi, nakka yirridjdja yi-bengkan marrngkidj Ubarr nawu o lorrkkon. Yirridjdja na-kudji duwa ngad na-warre kalkberd. Yiman\
laik kordang marrngkidj bu bad najing nakka yirridjdja yiman Bininj. Yiman ngarri-yime 'Oh djad kunj bi-rredjdjudmeng kabi-dedjdjudme anbu an-kole arri-djabname. Ka-re balay.\
\\xe As for the antilopine kangaroo, spears which were going to be used to hunt them had to be placed flat on the ground because if they were stood upright, if they stood up straight before being used to hunt the kangaroos, the animal would sense the presence of humans and become strong and powerful. If we were placing spears to be used in a kangaroo fire drive, we would put those spears down flat together with the spear thrower on the ground, when we were going off to do a kangaroo fire drive. If we were to put the spears upright in the camp, then the mind of the kangaroo would be alerted because fi:yirridjdja moiety kangaroos are like humans. Those kangaroos know everything about our intentions and can think 'Oh I feel energy welling up in my body, there must be humans coming.' When we camped the night before the kangaroo fire drive, [we would be mindful of the fact that] those fi:yirridjdja moiety kangaroos are associated with the Ubarr and the Lorrkkon ceremonies and have supernatural power. That's the case for fi:yirridjdja moiety kangaroos. But the fi:duwa moiety kangaroos, our moiety [speaker is fi:duwa moiety], they are not powerful like that. fi:Yirridjdja moiety kangaroos are like 'clever men', like human witch doctors. We would say things like this, 'that kangaroo has been [metaphorically] jabbed in the rump by a spear [which was not placed flat on the ground] and it will move away to a dsitant place now.'\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx dedjdjumbung\
\\ps adj.\
\\de short\
\\xv Ngal-dedjdjumbung ngalkka.\
\\xe That short woman.\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= dukkurrh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf0 \\lx dedjingmang\
\\va dedjdjingmang\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Begin, be ready to start.\
\\xv Ngaleng nalkbom, nalkbom dja dedjdjingmey wayihwayini.\
\\xe She cried and cried, then began to sing.   \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 132\
\\id DK\
\\dt 14/Jul/2016
\fs32 \
\
\\lx dedjkarlerrhminj\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge skinny\
\\re skinny\
\\de Skinny; a humorous term literally meaning 'arse-lizard.sp.-become'.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx dedjkorrk\
\\hm 1\
\\va dedjkorrk-dedjkorrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grebe\
\\re Australasian Grebe\
\\re fi:Tachybaptus_novaehollandiae\
\\de Australasian Grebe\
\\sc Tachybaptus novaehollandiae\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv dedjkorrk\
\\le dragonfly (I)\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 24/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dedjkorrk\
\\hm 2\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dragonfly\
\\re dragonfly\
\\de Dragonfly; also a nickname given to the Fairchild Aerospace Metro (a 19 seat twin turboprop airliner with a long thin fuselage like a dragonfly).\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= kaladjirridj, W= djalangkarridj-djalangkarridj, M= derrko\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 24/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dedjlahlarrk\
\\va dedjlarrhlarrk\
\\ps adj.\
\\de Naked.\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur Kdj= worrhworr\
\\syn lahlarrk\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx dedjmad\
\\pr man-\
\\va dedjmadno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de the roots of a plant\
\
\\lx dedjmaddurrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pull out plants by the roots\
\
\\lx dedjmadno\
\\ps n.\
\\de roots of a plant\
\
\\lx dedjmendurndulubun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de construct or manufacture something by slowly adding parts to it\
\\de 2. to learn knowledge or a skill gradually over an extended period of time\
\\xv Kabi-dedjmendurndulubun kabi-bukkan kabi-dedjkadjung.\
\\xe He is teaching him, showing him and he always follows him around (to learn).\
\
\\lx dedjmenmen\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de foundational knowledge 'right up from the beginning'.\
\
\\lx dedjmenmenbengkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de know intimately all the minute details of a subject eg. country, language, computer operation, how to\
play the guitar.\
\\xv Marrek kabani-wernhbengkan kaban-dedjmirnmirnbengkan an-kung djang.\
\\xe They don't really know well all the details about all the honey dreaming sites.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dedjmim\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dedj-mimno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de anus\
\
\\lx dedjmirrhdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de have a pointed abdomen or a barb in the base of the abdomen. This word is used to describe various\
insects such as wasps or hornets.\
\\xv "Ngarri-re yi-bengkan None" ngarri-yime. "Ngarri-kuyinworhnani ngarri-nani ka-rredjmirrhdi [sharp bum] woybukki"\
\\xe 'Let's go and follow that hornet honey spirit, you know', is what we'd say. We would start to look\
around and we would see it with its pointed abdomen there, truly!'\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dedjmowarre\
\\ps adj.\
\\de skinny, boney, thin-bodied\
\
\\lx dedjmowarremen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become skinny, thin-bodied\
\
\\lx dedjmurrngno\
\\va kun-dedjmurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de coccyx, tail bone\
\\sy gun-dumemurrng\
\
\\lx dedjnawarre\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term,speaker calls referent 'uncle' and hearer calls 'father'. Speaker refers as\
fv:na-dedjnawarre and hearer reciprocates with fv:na-karrngburrk.Speakers call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dedjnawarre\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n. kun-derbi kin term.\
\\de Speaker calls referent 'auntie' and hearer calls 'mother'. Speaker refers as fv:ngal-dedjnawarre and\
hearer reciprocates with fv:ngal-karrngburrk.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dedjngolihme\
\\va dedjngolihngolihme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de to shake one's bum when dancing.\
\\xv Kabirri-dedjngolihngolihme daluk.\
\\xe The women are shaking their bums in the dance.\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx dedjnjengh\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge language.interj.\
\\re interjection used by Kundedjnjenghmi speakers\
\\de Interjection used by Kundedjnjenghmi speakers which pragmatically marks membership in Kundedjnjenghmi language group\
\\xv "Dedjnjengh kan-wo djenj", yiman kabirri-djanohme.\
\\xe If they're loafing off someone they say (for example) "fv:Dedjnjengh give me some fish".\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx dedjnjenghmi\
\\pr kun-\
\\cf see fv:kundedjnjenghmi\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx dedjronj\
\\va djingronj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Merten's Water Monitor\
\\sc Veranus mertensi\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde burarr\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dedj-warlah\
\\ps n.\
\\de glutton, greedy guts (not in polite usage)\
\\lit 'bum wide'.\
\
\\lx dedjwarre\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.na-Kurulk clan lect name\
\\de 2.small amount\
\\xv Man-dedjwarre kano.\
\\xe Give me a small bit (of food).\
\\rd Na-dehdedjwarre.\
\\uv na-Kurulk clan lect\
\\cf nanjid\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dedj-widbirhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de slap on the bum\
\
\\lx dedj-yakbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de invert an object, usually a container to tip out the contents\
\
\\lx dekme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Fill up, become satiated, eat one's fill.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde worrkmen\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dekno\
\\va kun-dek\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de dorsal fin of fish\
\
\\lx deldelme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de shake or shiver\
\
\\lx delek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge white clay\
\\re clay, white\
\\re ochre, white\
\\de white ochre or clay, kaolin, huntite\
\\ee Delek is believed to be the faeces or vomitus of fv:ngalyod the rainbow serpent.\
There is a fv:djang or sacred site for white clay at fv:kudjarnngal near Manmoyi.\
\\xv Delek minj kabirri-karung kudjewk, and ngalyod ka-yo djang bu birri-karuyi wanjh\
kan-nguyi rowk.\
\\xe White clay could not be dug in the wet season as the rainbow serpent is active at this\
time and should they dig it they would be consumed.\
\\xv Manih delek ngukmak, ka-kukbarme duninj.\
\\xe This white clay is 'good shit' (of the rainbow serpent), it really is very bright.\
\\pdn kabbarrk\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx deleng\
\\va delengno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng Free noun in the form of fv:delengno (with the third person possessor suffix fv:-no only in Kuninjku, Kune and Kundedjnjenghmi dialects) and has the sense of 'contents (of a container)'. In a second sense the word appears as a suffix on core nominals with the sense of 'exclusive involved participant' (see Evans 2003:154). Incorporable in verbs such as fv:delengkan, delengmang, delengkurrme, delengdahkendong\
\\sn 1\
\\ge contents\
\\re contents\
\\de Contents.\
\\xv Ngalkka njamed Djidjnguk. Djenj nawu ga-ngun. Daluk ngalkka ngarre dja name delengno djenj nani.\
\\xe This [in picture] is Djidjnguk [fish spirit- or a being that lives exclusively on fish]. She is a woman and she has there a bag full of fish.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge involved.participant\
\\re involved participant\
\\de Nominal suffix 'exclusive involved participant'.\
\\xv La kunj birriwern bokenh nadjinem kabeneburren bokenh nadjinem kabeneburren. Bininj-deleng kabeneburren. Nawern, kolobbarr kunekke rerri, kornobolo.\
\\xe Pairs of various kangaroo species fight each other such as two black wallaroos, two male black wallaroos fight each other. Only the males fight each other. Many other species do too, antilopine kangaroos and agile wallabies.\
\\xv Daluk-deleng bene-burrinj?\
\\xe Was it only the two women [and not men] who were fighting?\
\\dt 31/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx delengkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge take.contents\
\\re take or carry contents in a container\
\\de Take or carry contents in a container.\
\\dt 31/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx delengmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge get contents in a container\
\\de Get something that can be placed in a container.\
\\xv La nungka wanjh duhdurndi, man-kung delengmey kured beneh-wam.\
\\xe Then he went back, got the sugar-bag in a container and they both went home.\
\\dt 31/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx delengdahkendong\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge put.in.container\
\\re put contents in a container\
\\de Place contents into a container.\
\\xv Man-dudjmi ngarri-delengdahkendoy kure biliken.\
\\xe We filled up the billycan with green plums.\
\\dt 31/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx delengno\
\\ps n.\
\\de see fv:deleng\
\
\\lx delhdel\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de Black ant\
\
\\lx delkke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de splash or spill fluid on something\
\
\\lx delkngerre\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_holosericea\
\\de Acacia sp.\
\\sc Acacia holosericea\
\\ee Used to make spears and leaves used as an ichthycide.\
\\uv I\
\\ur E =man-dulk, Djnj= an-dulk.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx dem\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lily.corm\
\\re waterlily corms\
\\re fi:Nymphaea_sp. roots\
\\de Edible corms of waterlilies\
\\xv Yi-bengkan an-dem, dorrhno ku-dedjmad.\
\\xe You know those corms, those lumps in the fi:Nymphaea_sp. roots?\
\\xv Yoh nganabbarru birri-yami ngarri-nguni, man-kung karrbarda nakkarn man-dem, djenj.\
\\xe Yes, they used to spear buffalo and we ate the meat and also honey, long yams, lily corms and fish.\
\\so Jacob Nayinggul\
\\pdv kk= man-marrbalk\
\\sy I= burdbarrk\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, E, I, W\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 30/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Demalkaldja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam estate north-east of Ngankorlord with pandanus grove and good place to hunt flying fox.\
\\uv E/D =Dhaymikaldja ('dh' =interdental)\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dembuy\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tri-relational.kinship\
\\re tri-relational kin term system\
\\de Tri-relational kinship reference system; Thus if person A is speaking to person B about person C, then A will use a term for C which also encodes B's kinship relationship to A. In turn B will likewise use a reciprocal referent in reference to C that also encodes the three way relationship.\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur W= kun-debi, I= kun-derbi, E= kun-derbui\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 25/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx Demed\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Well known hill in the Kunukdi estate, located around 8km south of the Djurlka waterfall just west of a narrow north-south running rocky ridge.  Demed is a rounded hill which rises from a forested savanna plain. The outstation resource agency based in Gunbalanya is named after this hill. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Denden\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on the walking route from Mikawake through Kunburray to Kamanemdi.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx Dendenday\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx denkuhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fail in an attempt\
\\xv Denkuhmeng kayakora dakalhminj.\
\\xn Barabom kayakki rayekminj.\
\\xe He failed to do it, no, he turned into stone [become hardened].\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde barabun\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dengabek\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de 1.River She-Oak 2.A small shrub\
\\sc 1.Casuarina cunninghamiana 2.Dolichandrone filiformis\
\\xv Manekke man-dengabek karri-bakme karri-burdebme, kun-rak karri-marnbun.\
\\xe That River She-Oak tree, we break it and rub the sticks together to make fire.\
\
\\lx denge\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps adv.\
\\ge by.foot\
\\re by foot\
\\re walking\
\\de By foot, by walking.\
\\xv Ku-rrenge ngarri-wam.\
\\xe We went by foot.\
\
\\lx denge\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dengeno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de foot, feet\
\\xv Ka-warddemelme njamed bokbobowk wanjh borok borok ka-madwokdi, dengeno, madbarnno, borok borok borok ba-yimeng.\
\\xe It [the black wallaroo] makes a noise when hopping on rock [represented by the song words] 'bokbobowk', the heel pads of its feet make a sound as it hops 'borok borok borok' is how it would go.\
\\pdn kk=kun-badjorr\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 2\
\\ge tyre\
\\re tyre\
\\de Tyre (of vehicle).\
\\xv Dengekerlkdanj ngadberre.\
\\xe Our tyre is flat.\
\\cf man-dengeyi\
\\ce Car, vehicle.\
\
\\lx dengebadjan\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dengebadjanno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge big.toe\
\\re big.toe\
\\de Big toe. \
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx dengebarrakbarrak\
\\ps adj.\
\\de feet with toes turned outwards, 'duck feet'\
\\sy denge-djirrkdjirrk.\
\
\\lx dengebodmeno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de top of foot.\
\
\\lx dengebok\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dengebokno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge footprint\
\\re footprint\
\\de Footprint.\
\
\\lx dengedolkkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lift feet up onto toes\
\
\\lx dengedulubun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de puncture the foot\
\\xv Karri-denge-dulubun karri-kudjmang.\
\\xe We puncture our feet and pull the splinters out.\
\
\\lx dengedjilbirdinjno\
\\sd body part\
\\ps n.\
\\de toes\
\\xv Kunj dengedjilbirdinjno\
\\xe Kangaroo toe.\
\
\\lx dengedjirrkdjirrk\
\\ps adj.\
\\de feet with toes turned outwards, 'tractor feet' (so called because the footprints of such a person look like\
the tracks left by tractor tyres)\
\\sy denge-barrakbarrak.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dengekolobbarr\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge little.toe\
\\re little.toe\
\\de Little toe.\
\\uv Kdj, W\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 29/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dengemerlem\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dengemerlemno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de sole of foot\
\\uv I, E  \
\\ur W= kun-dengemirrk.\
\\dt 09/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx dengemurrngno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge foot.bone\
\\re foot bone\
\\de Foot bone.\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 29/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dengengalanj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dengengalanjno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge toenails\
\\re toenails\
\\de Toenails.\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 29/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dengeyayyaw\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de little toe\
\
\\lx dengeyi\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de truck, motor vehicle (rarely used).\
\
\\lx denghke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cause OBJ to slow down, delay someone\
\\xv Kan-wohdenghke.\
\\xe You're delaying me (ie. I want to go).\
\
\\lx denghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stop moving (of large objects)\
\\xv 'Parachute' ka-bebme wanjh ka-kukdenghme manekke.\
\\xe The parachute appears and it (the aircraft) comes to a stop.\
\
\\lx Derdehkared\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de camping place in fv:Dankorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx Derndern\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region\
\\de Open area on a creek which flows into Magela Creek from the east. Derndern is located downstream from Nawarray near where the creek flows out of the rocky country, around 15km east-southeast of Jabiru airport. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 4/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx dernku\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de hard\
\\xv Nga-rrarokdi kun-dernku.\
\\xn Nga-wokdi kun-rayek.\
\\xe I speak the hard dialect.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-rayek\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx der\
\\pr an-\
\\va an-de\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re red ash tree\
\\re fi:Alphitonia_excelsa\
\\sd plant\
\\de red ash tree\
\\sc Alphitonia excelsa\
\\sy an-barrkkileng\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= dird\
\\p ander_Alphitonia_excelsa.jpg\
\\dt 30/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx derbikadjurren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de for speaker and addressee to use the same term to refer to a referent when using the fv:kun-derbi trireferential system, i.e. speaker's term and reciprocal term are identical.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx derbikan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de use triangular or third person kinship references\
\\cf kun-derbi\
\\ce (noun) triangular or third person kinship reference system\
\\xv Bu nga-ben-rdebikan nga-yime na-babba kamh-re wanjh ngudda yi-yime, yo, na-kiwalak\
namekke.\
\\xe If I was to use third person kinship reference, I would say fv:na-babba is coming, and you would say\
yes, that's fv:na-kiwalak.\
\\uv E =-derbuykan\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx derbikarren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de use the fv:kun-derbi trireferential system with each other.\
\
\\lx derbi\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kun-rderbi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tri-relational.kinship\
\\re tri-relational kinship terms\
\\de Special set of extensive tri-relational kinship terms. Thus if person A is speaking to person B about person C, then A will use a term for C which also encodes B's kinship relationship to A. In turn B will likewise use a reciprocal referent in reference to C that also encodes the three way relationship.\
\\uv I\
\\uv W= kun-debi, E= kun-derbuy, Kdj =kun-dembuy\
\\xv Kun-derbi man-wern ka-karrme.\
\\xe There are so many terms in the tri-relational kinship system.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx derbuy\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de a special set of triangular kinship terms\
\\cf see fv:rdebi\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =kun-derbi/kun-derbi, Dj =kun-dembuy\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx derbuykan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de use triangular or third person kinship references\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =-derbikan\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx derebadbalem\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kun-derbadbalem, derbadbalemno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kidney.fat\
\\re kidney fat\
\\de kidney fat\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 30/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx derebad\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kun-derbad, derebadno, derbadno, kun-debad\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kidney\
\\re kidney\
\\de kidneys\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= kun-dayken, kun-debad, Kdj= kun-debard\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 30/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx derhme\
\\cf see fv:rdehme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Derkkorlo\
\\va Drekkorlo, Drerkkorlo\
\\ph retroflexion may occur at any point over the first syllable thus the variant spellings\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Jawoyn fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan on the southern part of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Derkkorlo yirridjdja, Buyhmi koyek. Yawan ka-bolkderkkorlo.\
\\xe Derkkorlo is a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan and Buyhmi is to the east of it. Yawan is a place in the Derkkorlo clan estate.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so LBN\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Dermengk\'9c\
\\va Dhermengk\'9c\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\uv D, E\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dermi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de generic term for seeds of various acacia, grevillea and eucalyptus trees such as <Grevillea pteridifolia, Grevillea\
heliosperma, Acacia oncinocarpa, Acacia torulosa, Acacia dimidiata Eucalyptus tetrodonta>.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 23/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx derrehke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de move something away (or if -mderrehke, movement is towards speaker)\
\\xv Yi-derrehkemen darnki kodbarre.\
\\xe Move it away (and put it) close to the house.\
\
\\lx derrehme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de move away (short distance)\
\\xv Yi-derrehmen!\
\\xe Move away a bit.\
\\xv Yim-derrehmen!\
\\xe Come closer.\
\\pdn kk= derrehbonghme\
\
\\lx derrengkerdme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de the burial of an axe head into a surface usually wood\
\\xv Wanjh bi-marne-wenjhmeng kumekke kam-lobmeng yimarnek libkang, libkang, libkang,\
kun-kudji libkang, bekkang derrengkerd yimeng kabban bayeng na-mekke waliman dadken\
kare.......\
\\xe Then he tricked him into licking (the honey), he licked and licked and then he heard the sound of the\
axe squeaking in the wood as the handle was grabbed....\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Derri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate on a hill with rock art shelters.\
\
\\lx derrko\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dragonfly\
\\re dragonfly\
\\de Dragon fly.\
\\sy dedjkorrk\
\\uv M\
\\ur Kdj= kaladjirridj, W= djalangkarridj-djalangkarridj, I= dedjkorrk\
\\sd insects\
\
\\lx derrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spike OBJ with sharp thorn\
\\xv Yinahnarrimen kadjinh wardi ngunderrme!\
\\xe Look out, it has thorns, it might spike you!\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx dewdew\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dollar.bird\
\\re dollar bord\
\\de Dollar bird.\
\\sc Eurystomus orientalis\
\\xv Dewdew ka-kolung wanjh ka-wayhme kure man-kabo.\
\\xe The dollar bird swoops down and rises over creeks.\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 29/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx deyhbun / -rreyhbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de crush under one's finger eg. to crush a louse under one's fingernail.\
\
\\lx di\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge stand\
\\re stand\
\\de Stand.\
\\xv Med yi-rrin!\
\\xe Stay there, wait. (lit. you sing. stand imper.)\
\\xv Dingihdi.\
\\xe He stood there for some time.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge be.present\
\\re be present\
\\de Be present (especially temporarily or in a phase).\
\\xv Minj diwirrinj.\
\\xe She wasn't there.\
\\xv Ngudda bale yih-rri?\
\\xe Where have you been?\
\\xv Yekke ka-balemdi [kunj], yekke nakka bonj.\
\\xe In fv:yekke season [kangaroos] are fat, certainly in fv:yekke season.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge be.in-law\
\\re be in affinal relationship\
\\de Be in affinal relationship with someone.\
\\xv Bale yi-yime kela? Nguneh-di?\
\\xe What kinship relationship are you to Kela? Do you call him brother-in-law?\
\\pdn kk= djarrbelme\
\
\\lx didde\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of herbaceous wet season annual plant with purple flowers\
\\sc Patersonia macrantha\
\
\\lx didde\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mat\
\\re mat\
\\re net or woven mat\
\\de net or woven pandanus mat used as a sieve to process/rinse fv:an-gindjek cheeky yam slices fi:Dioscorea_bulbifera.\
\\sd material culture\
\
\\lx didderidinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de wasp species\
\
\\lx diddidmeng\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.stiff\
\\re stiff/sore\
\\de Be stiff and unable to move easily (of a body part).\
\\xv Nga-bodmediddidmeng.\
\\xe My back is stiff.\
\\dt 27/Sept/2010\
\
\\lx an-didjdjanku\
\\va an-didjkanku\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Amorphophallus_galbra plant\
\\re Arum plant\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of herbaceous plant of the Arum falmily with a subterranean tuber which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is\
rendered edible\
\\ee There is considerable variation in shape and size of these plants and as a result, different sizes of the same species may have different\
names in Bininj Kunwok.\
\\xv An-didjdjanku an-badjan.\
\\xe The fi:Amorphophallus_galbra called fv:an-didjdjanku is a large variety (compared to other kinds of named fi:Amorphophallus plants).\
\\sc Amorphophallus galbra\
\\uv Djnj\
\\pdn narrenku\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx didjilirrinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de cockatiel\
\\sc Nymphicus hollandicus\
\\xv Ka-yo ku-kambe didjilirrinj.\
\\xe The cockatiel lives in termite mounds.\
\
\\lx didjmurrng\
\\ps ideophone\
\\de sound made by didjeridu\
\\xv Morle ka-monhme ka-burrhnjudjme 'didjmurrng didjmurrng'.\
\\xe He's got a didjeridu and he's blowing it 'didjmurrng didjmurrng'.\
\
\\lx dihdi\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re fi:Canarium_australianum\
\\de Large tree (15-25m) with a spreading crown. Soft wood used for dug-out canoes, smoking pipes and carvings for the art market. The seeds are removed from the hard woody shell and eaten.\
\\sc Canarium australianum\
\\uv Djnj, I, E, W, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 01/May/2007\
\
\\lx Dihdihkalh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dihdihme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de poke an extended single finger back and forwards in a rude suggestive manner in front of one's cousin\
or kakkak\
\\xv Na-kurrng ke ngun-dihdihme.\
\\xe Your cousin is poking his finger at you.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dikkala\
\\va didjkala\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de a bush potato\
\\sc Cartonema spicatum, Cartonema trigonospermum (Altman also records Cartonema parviflorum as fv:didjkala).\
\\sy fv:mardidjdjad is the fv:duwa name.fv:Didjkala is the fv:yirridjdja name\
\
\\lx dikkala anbadjan\
\\lx didjkala anbadjan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de small herbaceous plant with an edible tuber, but in this case a larger specimen than normal\
\\xv Didjkala anbadjan, kunumeleng ka-kolhdebebme, yekke karri-karung karri-wilkdeng.\
\\xe The fv:Cartonema spp. tuber sprouts in the early wet season and we dig them up in the dry season and cook them under the ashes.\
\\sc Cartonema spicatum\
\
\\lx dilay\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\uv KWdj =man-marlanj\
\\de kurrajong\
\\sc Brachychiton diversifolius\
\\ee bark of stem used for making string\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dildil\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge waxplant\
\\re waxplant\
\\re fi:Hoya_australis\
\\de waxplant, kind of fleshy scrambling creeper with clusters of small white flowers which grows in the sandstone country\
\\sc Hoya australis\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= djorrkundedjmildungh, E= djorrkundedjmilrduk\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx dile\
\\pr man-\
\\va dileno\
\\ps n.\
\\de urine\
\
\\lx dile\
\\pr kun-\
\\va dile\
\\ps n.\
\\ge armband\
\\re armband made from black wallaroo bladders\
\\de a kind of sacred armband made from the bladder of a black wallaroo\
\\xv Makka dileno ngarri-weyi. Ngarri-dileweyi. Bad fi:that njamed dile ngarri-nami dile. Kuneh ngarriyime ngarri-berldukkaren\
ngarri-nami nakka nadjamun. Ngalbardyi Wubarr kangeyo fi:that_for_business kun-dile kunj.\
\\xe We'd throw away the urine. We threw the urine away. But that bladder, we used that. We would tie it on our arms, as a sacred armband. An armband\
used in the Wubarr ceremony, sacred ceremonial business, the kangaroo's bladder armband.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Dilebang\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de Place on the Arnhem Land escarpment outlier area near Manmoyi in fv:Kidbulmaniyimarra estate. A totemic site for the king brown snake fv:dadbe.\
\\en duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dilebang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rainbow.fish\
\\re rainbow fish\
\\re Melanotaenia spp.\
\\de Various kinds of rainbow fish and hardyheads e.g. Banded rainbow fish, Mariana's hardyhead. Some speakers also include the spotted blue-eye or the delicate blue-eye.\
\\sc Melanotaenia trifasciata, Craterocephalus marianae\
\\sd fish\
\
\\lx dilebanj\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re smell of urine\
\\de smell of urine\
\\xv Konda ka-bolkdilebanj!\
\\xe This place stinks of piss!\
\
\\lx dilebun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de urinate\
\\sy lebun, djorrkoybun\
\
\\lx dile-dadjkerren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\de abruptly interrupt urination\
\
\\lx dilh\
\\ps naked verb\
\\de sound which represents the action of making a dot\
\\xv Djal bimwi yuwurrinj yiman delek bolkki ngah-bimbom wolewoleh kunekke ka-yimeninj\
kun-kudji dilh dilh dilh.\
\\xe There was only (solid figure) images in white ochre like I use today and like I painted before with dots,\
one by one dot dot dot.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dilhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de cut\
\\xv Kun-murlbbuy yi-rrilhkemen ngardduk.\
\\xn Kun-kanj yi-rradjkemen ngardduk.\
\\xe Cut me some meat.\
\\pde dadjke\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dilhme\
\\hm 1\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de shuffle cards or paper\
\
\\lx dilhme\
\\hm 2\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Cut open, tear.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dadjme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dilhme\
\\hm 3\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Paint or draw dots.\
\\xv Yoh dilhdilhmeninj la ngaleng Mardayin birri-rarrkwemeninj man-karre nawu na-djamun\
'old fashione one'.\
\\xe Yes, he used to paint dots but for Mardayin ceremony they used 'rarrk' (cross hatching) which was the old fashioned way.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dilib\
\\ps n.\
\\de tea (leaf)\
\\bw from English 'tea leaf'\
\\pdn kk= man-worred\
\
\\lx dilkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de carve a mark on wood, especially a message stick\
\
\\lx Dilng\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Place near the very southern reaches of the Goomadeer River, however probably in the East Alligator river catchment. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx dimirn-dimirn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de water skaters.\
\\xv Kaddum nakka dimirndimirn yiman ka-yime komrdawh, djang nakka.\
\\xe At the top, those are water skaters, somewhat like long neck turtle, they are dreaming beings.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Dinhmi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de a Jawoyn patriclan name\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so LBN\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx dinidini\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cicada\
\\re cicada\
\\de common Australian cicada\
\\sc Cyclochila australasiae\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= dirnadirna \
\
\\lx Dingkukyoy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate on Marrkolidjban creek.\
\
\\lx dinjh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bird sp.\
\\re mistletoe bird\
\\de mistletoe bird\
\\xv Namekke dinjh dinjh dinjh kayime.\
\\xe The mistletoe bird sings out 'dinjh dinjh dinjh'.\
\\ee The mistletoe bird feeds exclusively on fruits of mistletoe.\
\\sc Dicaeum hirundinaceum\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= djirnidjirnirrinjken\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 25/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx Dinjhmi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Clan name associated with Jawoyn language and the upper Mann River region.\
\\xv Djal Mann River. Nawu Dinjhmi Bokmarnde, anekke Mann River.\
\\xe Still on the Mann River. Those Dinjhmi and Bokmarnde clans are on the Mann River.\
\\sd clan name\
\\dt 10/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx dinjhno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\sd plant\
\\ge butt\
\\de butt of a branch protruding from the main stem after it has been cut off.\
\\sn 2\
\\sd fish\
\\ge caudal_bump\
\\de 2. two dots at end of caudal area of kurrkurrbi (large catfish)\
\\sy bukkarnno\
\\cf kodjdinjhno\
\\ce the knob on the head of the Magpie Goose.\
\\dt 25/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx dinjhwern\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge bump.many\
\\re bumps, lumps or serrations on the surface of a plant\
\\de (of plants) having a toothed or serrated edge or surface or many small lumps or bumps\
\\sn 2\
\\re stumps (of trees), having many lopped branch stumps\
\\de (of trees) having many lopped off or broken branches or branch stumps\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx Dird\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Waridjngu clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dird\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge moon\
\\re moon\
\\de Moon.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge month\
\\re month\
\\de Month, the lunar cycle.\
\\xv Kaluk bu dird bokenh o yikahwi danjbik, wanjh kabirri-burnbun wanjh manbu man-warddewarrehwarre kabirri-warddewe, kabirri-warddedurndiwe, wanjh kabirri-warddedudjeng.\
\\xe After two to three months, they finish the process and the waste rock is taken and disposed of by burying it.\
\\sy karrakbal\
\
\\lx dird\
\\ps n.\
\\ge legless.lizard\
\\re legless lizard\
\\re fi:Lialis_burtonis\
\\de Legless lizard.\
\\sc Lialis burtonis\
\\pdn kk= berrebabi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dird\
\\hm 2\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de red ash\
\\sc Alphitonia excelsa\
\\ee many uses, leaves for bush soap\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv dird\
\\le 1. legless lizard spp. 2. moon\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dird\
\\hm 3\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de legless lizard\
\\ee Probably generic for all legless lizards. There are at least three different species of legless lizard found in the Top End of the N.T. The generic name fv:dird literally means 'moon'. Some people use the Aboriginal English name 'moon snake' for legless lizards.\
\\sc Delma borea, Pygopus nigriceps, Lerista karlschmidti\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv dird\
\\le 1. red ash tree, 2. moon\
\\lf polysemy\
\\dt 28/Nov/2011\
\
\\lx Dirdbim\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\lit fv:dird-bim "moon image/picture"\
\\de about one kilometre north of Yikarrakkal in the Kubumi region, Dirdbim is a rock formation and moon dreaming sacred site. A large round hole high up in the rock face is said to be the shape of the full moon. Dirdbim lies in the Kubumi estate \
\\en duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dirdde\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de woven dilly bag\
\\dv Kun-madj, djerrh karri-marnbun.\
\
\\lx dirddid\
\\ps n.\
\\ge isopod.sp.\
\\re isopod sp.\
\\de kind of isopod, living in freshwater\
\\xv Dirddid nawu karri-nan ka-wake ku-bak karri-mang nawu, yiman ka-yime wakih ka-rohrok. Nakka dirddid ka-ngeyyo. Ku-kukukukku karri-nan namekke nawu dirddid namekke nawu kuwukku ka-rri. 'Nii-nii-nii' ka-yime bad dirddid ngarri-ngeybun. Yi-bakmang yiman manbu karri-bakwe yi-nan bu ka-balbebme 'sss-sss-sss' ka-yime dirddid. Kukak ka-wakerren kubahbabak ka-rri nakka nungan, yiman ka-yime wakih. Yiman ka-yime ngal-kilelkilel djindidj, yiman karri-kilkken. Kabarri-raworren dirddid, wakih, djakorlk, ngalng, kukak kabarri-bebme. Kabarri-rawon wakih-ngong. Ka-bakkadjung kubahbabak yiman yi-bakmang, yi-bakwe, djakorlk yi-we yi-bakmang dja wakih yaw yi-mang, bu djenjken yi-mang yi-nan nawu mayh ngarri-ngeybun dirddid.\
\\xe fv:We can see Dirddid (isopods) crawling around in the water weed and they are similar to freshwater prawns. They live in any kind of freshwater, those dirddid isopods. They make the sound 'nii-nii-nii' but we call them dirddid. When you are getting water weed, throwing water weed aside, you can see them going 'sss-sss-sss'. At night you can see them crawling around in the water weed, just like a prawn. They are also similar to tiny prawn-like crustaceans called fv:djindidj which live down (in the creek) here. Those isopods live together with prawns, small gudgeon fish and yabbies, and they come out at night. They live together with all kinds of crustaceans (or prawns). They are attracted to water weeds, so that when you getting bait (small gudgeon or small prawns) for fishing, that's when you can see those isopods which we call fv:dirddid.\
\\sc Isopod sp.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 04/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx dirdko\
\\ps n.\
\\de moonlight\
\\xv Dirdko karri-re.\
\\xe Let's go by moonlight.\
\
\\lx dirnadirna\
\\ph dina-rdina\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cicada\
\\re cicada\
\\de common Australian cicada\
\\sc Cyclochila australasiae\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= dinidini\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 29/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dirnku\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\pr \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cycad\
\\re cycad\
\\re fi:Cycas_armstrongii\
\\de cycad, cycad damper\
\\sc Cycas armstrongii\
\\ee The nuts of the cycad are crushed into a pulp and toxins leached by placing the pulp in running water and then dried, made into a flour\
and cooked into a loaf.\
\\xv Man-dirnku ngarri-ngun, la ka-banj yiman kordduk.\
\\xe 'We eat cycad [damper], but it smells like shit [during preparation].'\
\\xv Dirnku kabani-rohrok bad an-kokbo an-kukbuyika. Malayi bu ngarri-re Kumarneng nga-mang bukkan ngudberre.\
\\xe It's similar to fv:an-dirnku fi:(Cycas_armstrongii) but fv:an-kokbo is a different cycad fi:(Cycas_conferta). If we ever go to Kumarneng some time, I'll\
show you.\
\\xv An-dirnku arri-ngowkme an-me ka-karrme.\
\\xe The cycad has food, we grind it (the fruit).\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx dirrhbinj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de the cracked black mud of flood plains\
\\cf dirrhbinj-barrbarrhmeng\
\\ce the tessalated pattern of the many cracks in the mud\
\
\\lx dirrhbinj-barrbarrhmeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de the cracked black mud of flood plains\
\
\\lx dirrhbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place OBJ into belt\
\\xv Birri-bimbom mimih dirrhbom dadken.\
\\xe They painted a mimih with a stone axe in his belt.\
\
\\lx dirri\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de play\
\\xv Wurdurd beh ngurri-dirri kandi-bengbun.\
\\xe You kids go and play over there, you're driving me crazy.\
\
\\lx dirridjalbelme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dance\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde borrkke\
\\sy borrkidjbonghme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx diwidj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pygmy.goose\
\\re green pygmy-goose\
\\re fi:Nettapus_ pulchellus\
\\de Green pygmy-goose\
\\sc Nettapus pulchellus\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= biwudj\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx diyawarra\
\\va diywarra\
\\ps n.\
\\de a kind of wild honey (sugar bag), found high up in trees, like syrup.\
\\pdn kk= 1. ngalwadjamari 2. ngalkarrngmari\
\
\\lx dobad\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de steel axe\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kurlbburru\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dobboken\
\\ps n.\
\\de bundle, group (rarely used)\
\\xv Dobboken ka-rri.\
\\xe There's a bundle of them.\
\\xv Dobboken ngurri-marnburren.\
\\xe Organise yourselves into a group.\
\\sy ku-kudji\
\
\\lx Dobdobma\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de Creek area on an upper branch of Mandedjkadjang Creek (Muralidbar Creek), around 6km south-southeast of Demed hill. It is a junction for the bininj manbolh (traditional walking route) which goes to Mibarra in Kumarrirnbang estate. There is a little brook on the creek and a flat rock there. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx doddorok\
\\va doddoro\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rock.pigeon\
\\re rock pigeon (chestnut-quilled)\
\\re chestnut-quilled rock pigeon\
\\re fi:Petrophassa_rufipennis\
\\de chestnut quilled rock pigeon\
\\sc Petrophassa rufipennis\
\\ur E= borrobborro\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dokan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go, travel\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde re\
\\xv Kondanj nga-morndi la yi-rroka.\
\\xn Kondanj nga-ni la yi-ray.\
\\xe I'll stay here, you go.\
\\dt 29/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dokkorn\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge field.rat\
\\re rat, pale field rat\
\\re pale field rat\
\\re fi:Rattus_tuneyi\
\\de Pale field rat.\
\\sc Rattus tunneyi\
\\sn 2\
\\re Arnhem rock rat\
\\re fi:Zyzomys_maini\
\\de Arnhem rock rat.\
\\sc Zyzomys maini\
\\xv Dokkorn kun-yungki bininjni mako buhmebuhmeng la djaddi wayihwayini. Bolkki wanjh mayh yimerranj.\
\\xe In the beginning, Pale Field Rat was a man. He used to play the didjeridoo and the frog used to sing. Today they have turned into animals.\
\\pdn kk= dokkorn\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dokme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge set.off\
\\re set off, get going\
\\de Set out, get going, start walking.\
\\xv A: Bonj nga-rrokme. B: Ma yi-rrokmen!\
\\xe A: Well I'll go home now. B: Ok you go home.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge go.ahead\
\\re go ahead, go first\
\\de Go ahead, go first (leaving others behind), overtake.\
\\xv La ngarri-dokme ngarri-yingkihdi. Nawu dokmeninj wanjh diwirrinj.\
\\xe So we would go ahead and stand there beforehand [before fires were lit]. Those who would go on ahead would just stay there.\
\\xv Kan-marnedokmedokmen yim-madjngorrkngorrka, kumekke yi-rrahkenwe kumekke ngarr-yo.\
\\xe [song text] You go on ahead for me and get [my] swag; lay it out on the ground there and we will sleep there.\
\\cf dokodokme\
\\ce move ahead quickly, get a move on\
\\dt 30/Nov/2008\
\\uv W, Kdj, Djnj, I\
\\ur E= -yingkibun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dolbbe\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bloodwood.bark\
\\re bark of bloodwoods\
\\de bark of smooth light coloured bloodwood trees such as fi:Corymbia_polysciada\
\\sd plant\
\
\\lx dolbbo\
\\va dolhbo?\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Banded Grunter / Black-striped Grunter\
\\xv Dolbbo, Kubumi ka-rri.\
\\xe There are Banded Grunter fish at Kubumi (on the Mann River).\
\\sc Amniataba percoides\
\\uv I\
\\ur W =mandiddi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Dolbbu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge prop.n.\
\\de Place name in Benebenemdi estate. Yam story associated with this site. In 1963 Barabba clansman Mandarrk and his family met a party of surveyors at Dolbbu. The surveyors turned east at this point.\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx dolbdolbme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de pulsate\
\\xv Karri-kurlba-dolbdolbme karri-bekkarren.\
\\xe We can feel our blood pulsing.\
\
\\lx dolek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wood.grubs\
\\re wood grubs\
\\de Larvae of various insects which lives in timber including witchetty grubs and various large species of termites.\
\\xv Dolek ngukno ku-rredj ka-rri kure man-djoh.\
\\xe The wood grub lives in the base of Acacia trees.\
\\uv I, W\
\\ur Kdj, Djnj= kodjdjorn\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 30/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dolhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.surface from beneath the water\
\\de 2.born, appear as a new generation.\
\\xv Larrk, marrek mardayin birri-bimbuyi, ya nadjamun and ngarri-kerrnge and ngarri-kernge\
ngarri-dolhmeng djang ngarri-bimbun, ngarri-bimbom and ngalyod and njalehnjale.\
\\xe No, they didn't paint Mardayin ceremony designs, they are sacred, but we, the new generation have\
appeared and we paint sacred dreamings such as rainbow serpents and what have you.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mandolhdolh\
\\ps n.\
\\re cucumber\
\\re wild cucumber\
\\re fi:Curcumis_melo\
\\de Bush cucumber vine with an edible fruit available in the wet season; annual climbing or trailing herb with simple tendrils.\
\\sc Curcumis melo\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= man-dawk, Djnj, Kdj= an-dawk\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 30/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dolhwarr\
\\va dorlhwarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Short-eared rock wallaby.\
\\sc Petrogale brachyotis\
\\sn 2\
\\de Rock ringtail possum.\
\\sc Petropseudes dahli\
\\sn 3\
\\de Nabalek\
\\sc Peradorcus concinna\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde 1. badbong 2. djorrkkun 3. nabarlek\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dolkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge jump up\
\\de Jump out, jump up.\
\\xv Arri-kuyinruy, bad wurdyaw nga-marneyimeng werrk yi-bulewemen kumekke mak medjidj ngane-kang werrk buleweng.  Bulewarlahminj ngane-dolkang ngane-bolkmelmeng. Ngane-ruyi.\
\\xv we nearly got burnt I said to the boy, quick light a fire and backburn with these matches we were carrying. When the burnt area was big enough we jumped into it for safety. We nearly got burnt.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge rise.up\
\\re rise up, pour out\
\\xv Ka-borrolkan.\
\\xe The water is boiling/The water/fluid is rising up.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge fly\
\\re fly\
\\de Fly.\
\\xv Yika ka-marrwedowen, ka-ngun ka-yawoyhre kure ka-rrolkan ka-wakwakbun kabi-yawoyhdurndeng ka-yawoyhrrabungun |fs\{same place\}. \
\\xe If it is really hungry it will fly off and circle above and return again to eat an egg at the same place. \
\\uv W, Kdj, Djnj, I\
\\ur E =walhwalhme.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dolke\
\\pr kun-\
\\sd body part\
\\de back\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-bodme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dolkkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge get.up\
\\re get up, stand up\
\\re stand up, get up\
\\re arise\
\\de Get up, arise; from lying down to sitting or sitting to standing.\
\\xv "Yi-rrolkka" bi-marne-yime-ng na-ngamed, rdorddoro, "Yi-rrolkka" bene-marneyimeng. Ay lorlb dolkkang, dolkkang wanjh ningihni, ningihni rowk.\
\\xe \'93Arise!\'94 she said to her, whatshername, rock pigeon, \'93Arise!\'94 they both said. And she popped up, she arose, she got up and sat there, all [the birds] sat there.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge set.out\
\\re set out (on journey)\
\\de Set out on a journey.\
\\xv Bu ngamed beh ane-dolkkang Bonbonngoro kondawi. Nawula Kabarnmang ngani-malaberrkyameng Anwarrkdjirdkorrang manih makka berrkno.\
\\xe We set out from whatsisname, Bonbonngoro [to] here. [From] Nawula Kabarnmang we walked through the savanna forest the next morning through Anwarrkdjirdkorrang, this savanna forest here.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge get.out.bed\
\\re get out of bed\
\\de Get out of bed. Get up from sleep.\
\\xv A: Bulanj dolkkang? B: Korroko.\
\\xeA: Had Bulanj got up [out of bed] yet? B: [yes] Already.\
\\sn 4\
\\ge come.from\
\\re come from place of origin\
\\de Come from place of origin.\
\\xv Yaw bu like ngaleng ngalengman ka-rrolkkan ku-kurlkbe.\
\\xe The child, as the dreaming rises up, herself, through the ground.\
\\xv Yoh konda kurrmerrinj kumekke ka-djorlok and ka-wardderri. Yoh nuk baleh beh nakka kum-dolkkang. \
\\xe Yes they [dreaming beings] put themselves here, there is a hole there and some rocks. Yes, but I don't know where they came from.\
\\pdn kk= rumhme\
\
\\lx dolng\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de smoke\
\
\\lx dolobbo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de bark of Eucalyptus tetrodonta used for hundreds of uses, today one of the most popular being for bark\
paintings.\
\\xv Dolobbo nga-bimbun.\
\\xe I'll do a bark painting.\
\\pdn kk = kungkuh\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Dol\'9cmyi\
\\va Dolomyi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate, a Wubarr ceremony place. Kune speakers sometimes refer to the\
place fv:Ngalngdjang in fv:Kardbam estate by this name also. (DK)\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Dombokarrmeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate, site for Kunabibi ceremony.\
\
\\lx dombun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de extinguish a fire, turn off something eg. light, radio, engine\
\\xv Dombom.\
\\xe He turned it off.\
\\pdn kk = kamukke\
\
\\lx domono\
\\pref\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn 1.\
\\ge path\
\\re path\
\\re route\
\\de route or walking path, a track through the bush made by humans or animals\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng incorporable\
\\xv Djalbangurrk . Nabang bani-reyi, Wurrngiyele bani-reyi, ken Wurrlele.   Wurrlele bani-nani kun-bolk. Domono bininj Nakorrhko. \
\\xe Djalbangurrk, Nabang in Wurrngiyele I mean Wurrlele estate. At Wurrlele they were looking at the country there. The route taken by\
the Nakorrhko,\
\\xv A: Walebuyika nungka barrk?   \
B:Kukbuyika domobuyika kayo kuwardde. Kuwardde nakka nungka, bad kalkberd\
domono ka-yikan karrimen ku-djelk. \
\\xe A: Is the behaviour of black wallaroos similar to euros or different?   \
B: Different species and different movement patterns/routes. They\
are spending more time in the rock country. But euros are animals that make paths out of the rocks, on softer ground.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge wallaby_path\
\\re wallaby path\
\\de path in the bush made by frequent movement of agile wallabies along the same route\
\\xv Domono ka-marren anbu kure kakolung, kabidbun wanjh ka-rri.\
\\xe It takes its path that it has made to go down (to drink), it then goes back up to the higher ground and stays there.\
\\xv Kornobolo fi:same_way domono. La nungka kalkberd wolerrk modjdjunno. Barrk bobirkno.\
\\xe The track name fI:domono is the same for agile wallabies. But the euro worn path is called fi:modjdjunno. For the black wallaroos, it's\
called fi:bobirkno.\
\\ee Any path made by animals can be called fv:domono, but there are also special names for these paths made by various species of macropod. The paths made by agile wallabies however do not have another specialist term and are simply referred to as fv:domono.\
\\dt 17/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx domorddomo\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Asteromyrtus_magnifica\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_cornucopiae\
\\de kind of Asteromyrtus tree\
\\xv An-domorddomo yiman an-lombeng ku-warddewaken.\
\\xe The fi:Asteromyrtus_magnifica is similar to fi:Asteromyrtus_symphocarpa but it grows in the rock country.\
\\sc Asteromyrtus magnifica, Melaleuca cornucopiae\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx donabonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de fold up\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde doname\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx doname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de fold up\
\\xv Blengked karri-doname.\
\\xe Let's fold up the blankets.\
\\pdn donabonghme\
\
\\lx donamerren\
\\ps v. refl.\
\\ge coil.up\
\\re coil up\
\\de Coil around, lay in coils (e.g. snakes)\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx dong\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.hit one object against another, crash against something\
\\xv Murrikang birri-dorrinj.\
\\xe The cars crashed into one another.\
\\xv Birri-kodj-dorrinj\
\\xv They hit their own heads (in grief).\
\\de 2. pound\
\\xv Yo birri-doy man-dudjmi. Ya birri-kang kondanj dabborrabbolk wanjh ngandi-bukkang ngadberre wanjh ngarrih-doy manih manbu kun-wardde.\
\\xe Yes, they used to pound the green plums. The old old people used to take them here and they showed us and we pounded up that Buchanania obovata fruit.\
\\pdn kk= lorlme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dongimen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dry out of plants, plant material become dry\
\\xv Ka-rralk-dongimen, korroko dongiminj.\
\\xe The grass is drying out, it's already dry.\
\\uv E (na-rayek)\
\\uv I = darlehmen\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dongino\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de dry plant material\
\\xv Nani dulk-dongino ka-rri.\
\\xe That's a dead/dried tree there.\
\\uv E (na-rayek)\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dord\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de head louse\
\\pdn kk= barndidj\
\
\\lx dord\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de a grass, used to tie the fish trap fv:man-djabu into place in the water.\
\\sc awaiting identification, possibly Cyperus aquatilus\
\
\\lx dord\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of grass\
\\xv Dord Kunbarlanja karri kabbal, kawardde kayakki.\
\\xe The fv:Cyperas digitalis grass grows near Kunbarlanja on the plains and not in the rock country.\
\\sc Cyperas digitalis\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx dorddord\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de generic for Eucalypts which produce woody capsules or gum nuts.\
\
\\lx dordedjke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Turn something/someone around or over.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde borledke\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dordedjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Turn, change.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde borledme\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dordnan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de look for head lice\
\\xv Kan-dord-nan.\
\\xe Search me for lice.\
\
\\lx Dordo\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de A creek flowing west in a gorge as a tributary of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek, just north of Kolobarr Kabokbok. It runs east-west to the south of Mabangkarak hill.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 12/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Dordokkiyu\
\\va Dordokiyu\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\re clan estate name upper East Alligator\
\\de Estate name on the far upper East ALligator River containing a fv:bod_djang and green plum dreaming. Also known as fv:Dedjrungi.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 27/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx Dordorrknokah\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate. Patrol officer Kyle-little in the 1950s called this place 'Red Rock'!\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dorlh\
\\ps ideophone\
\\de the sound made by playing clap sticks (two pieces of iron wood hit together).\
\\xv "Mongerrh, mongerrh, mongerrh, mongerrh kan-djula birrirri buwani bu," 'dorlh',\
man-berlnginj 'dorlh'. Kuni wam 'dorlh' bom, 'dorlh' bom, 'dorlh' bom wanjh.\
\\xe (He sang a song); "Mongerrh, mongerrh, mongerrh, mongerrh kan-djula birrirri buwani bu," and he hit\
the clap sticks 'clap', and he went along like that, 'clap' he hit them, 'clap' he hit them and so on.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dorlhwarrh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Short-eared rock wallaby\
\\sc Petrogale brachyotis\
\\uv Kundedjwarre clan lect\
\\uv I=badbong\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dornbun\
\\va donbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge peel\
\\re peel\
\\de peel skin off fruit or vegetable\
\\xv Kan-marnedornbu!\
\\xe Peel it for me!\
\\dt 22/Sep/2004\
\
\\lx dorok\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge eucalypt.sp.\
\\re eucalypt sp.\
\\de kind of eucalypt bloodwood tree\
\\sd plant\
\\ee The identification of this tree is not clear. Possible cadidates include fi:Corymbia_foelscheana, fi:Corymbia_latifolia, and fi:Eucalyptus_confertiflora. \
\\sc fi:Corymbia_latifolia?\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx doru\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de sand fly\
\
\\lx dorrek\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge clan.interj\
\\re clan interjection for Durlmangkarr clan\
\\de One of the two fv:Kundangwok clan interjections for the Durlmangkarr clan, the other being fv:nadedjmorle.\
\\sd kun-dangwok\
\\dt 31/Mar/2008 \
\
\\lx dorreng\
\\ps prep.\
\\de with\
\\xv ngad dorreng\
\\xe us and everyone else\
\
\\lx dorrengh-ni\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de have been present (with someone else)\
\
\\lx dorrhno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge stem\
\\re stem of any plant\
\\de Stem of any plant, \
\\sd plant\
\
\\lx dorrhno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de corms or small tubers produced by various plants\
\\xv Wayuk kakarrme dorrhno kudedjmad.\
\\xe fv:Nymphaea spp. waterlilies have corms in their roots.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx dorrkbakbak\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\pr \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\ge waxplant\
\\re waxplant\
\\re fi:Hoya_australis\
\\de waxplant, kind of scrambling creeper with fleshy leaves and clusters of small white flowers, growing in the sandstone country\
\\xv Kun-ngeybokenh djorrkkundedjmildungh dja an-dorrkbakbak.\
\\xe There are two names, [for fi:Hoya_australis] fi:djorrkkundedjmildungh and fi:an-dorrkbakbak.\
\\sc Hoya australis\
\\uv E (dorrkbakbak) , Djnj (an-dorrkbakbak)\
\\dt 25/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx dorrorroke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.drag\
\\xv Mongerrh ben-mey rowk ben-dorrorrokeng ben-dorrorrokeng 'bag' ben-dahkendoy wanjh\
ben-kang wanjh kumekke ben-yi-rerrkang. "Kondanj nga-ben-kerribun wanjh," yimeng.\
\\xe Mongerrh got them all and dragged and dragged them, put them inside a bag and sat down with them.\
"I'll cook them in a ground oven here," he said.\
\\de 2. tow (eg. a truck).\
\\de 3. tell a long story\
\\xv Yiman kabirri-woknan kabirri-dorrorroke Namayhkurdihwarr Kundedjwarre\
kabirri-wokdi.\
\\xe Just like when they sing out to the ancestors they tell a long story in Kundedjwarre clan lect and use\
the word Namayhkurdihwarr.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dowen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.be sick, ill\
\\xv Doweng wam.\
\\xe It's gone away injured.\
\\de 2. die\
\\xv doweng\
\\xe dead\
\\de 3. diminish\
\\xv Dird ka-rrowen.\
\\xe The moon is waning.\
\\de 4. laugh hard\
\\xv Ka-rrowen nakkan.\
\\xe He's really laughing hard.\
\\de 5. crave something\
\\xv Nga-kombuk-dowen.\
\\xe My throat is dry.\
\\xv Bakki ngarri-dowen.\
\\xe We're starving for tobacco.\
\\pdn kk= ngarirrihme\
\
\\lx dowerren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de die (of large numbers).\
\
\\lx dowiken\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de death\
\
\\lx dowkke\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de feel sore\
\\xv Nga-dowkkerren kun-mok.\
\\xe I have a sore which hurts.\
\\xv Karri-dowkke.\
\\xe We feel sore.\
\
\\lx dowkke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de fire a gun, cause to explode\
\\xv Nangale dowkkeng?\
\\xe Who fired that shot?\
\
\\lx dowkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de explode, the discharging of a gun, the bursting of a balloon\
\\cf -biddowkme\
\\ce clap hands\
\
\\lx dowkmiyakmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge end.firing\
\\re end of gunshots\
\\de The cessation of gunshots.\
\\xv Bonj, dowkmiyakminj, ngabbarru kareh.\
\\xe The shooting has finished, maybe a buffalo (has been shot).\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx doy\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge arranged.marriage\
\\re arranged marriage\
\\de Promised or arranged marriage.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge father.in.law\
\\re father-in-law and son-in-law relationship\
\\de A man's father-in-law, a man's son-in-law.\
\
\\lx doybun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de give daughter in marriage\
\
\\lx doyburren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\de be in fv:doydoy relationship\
\\xv Kabene-doyburren.\
\\xe They call each other fv:doydoy.\
\
\\lx doydoy\
\\ps n.\
\\ge father-in-law\
\\re father-in-law, also MMM(B) and (Z)DDS; FFM(B) and (Z)SSS\
\\de Father-in-law; especially reciprical referent term for uncle and nephew when they are in an actual or classificatory in-law relationship but also MMM(B) and (Z)DDS; FFM(B) and (Z)SSS. Amongst dialect groups the class of kin designated as fv:doydoy can vary. In Kundjeyhmi it includes FFM, FMF and MFF.\
\\xv Manu Kudjaborrng wanjh kumekke bi-bayeng ngal-yuhyungki doydoy ngal-durlmangkarr.\
\\xe Kudjaborrng is the place where the ancestral woman my MMM a Durlmnagkarr clanswoman was bitten by the Oenpelli python.\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 30/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx doydoyhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge call.doydoy\
\\re call OBJ doydoy 'MMM(B) etc'\
\\de Call OBJ doydoy 'father-in-law' i.e. MMM(B) and (Z)DDS; FFM(B) and (Z)SSS\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 30/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx dodoyhmiken\
\\ps n.\
\\ge in.doydoy.relationship\
\\re be in fv:doydoyh relationship\
\\de Be in fv:doydoyh relationship; one's fv:doydoyh (e.g. MMM(B)/(Z)DDS, FFM(B)/(Z)SSS).\
\\xv Nanih na-rroydoyhmiken.\
\\xe This is his fv:doydoyh.\
\\xv Ngune-doydoyhmiken.\
\\xe You two call each other fv:doydoyh.\
\
\\lx doyngu\
\\pr na-\
\\cf see -rroyngu.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx doyngu\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent brother's\
daughter, hearer calls referent sister's daughter.\
\\cn ngal-ngarrkka\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx drangkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be drunk\
\\xv Ka-drangkme.\
\\xe He's drunk.\
\
\\lx Drennokah\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\ee Barrarnno kumekke. 'There's a gorge there.'\
\\uv E/D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dubang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Coal Grunter\
\\sc Hephaestus carbo\
\
\\lx dubang\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de iron wood\
\\sc Erythrophleum chlorostachys\
\\ee millions of uses, one of which is to burn the green leaves and produce purifying smoke to 'cleanse'\
places and people.\
\\pdn kk= djirrpara\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx dubbe\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge dysfunctional\
\\de Dysfunction of physical or sensory faculty.\
\\xv Yi-kanemdubbe!\
\\xe Can't you hear?\
\\cf mimdubbe\
\\ce blind\
\\cf djendubbe\
\\ce unable to speak\
\\cf kanemdubbe\
\\ce deaf\
\\cf daddubbe\
\\ce having one leg, (leg) amputee\
\\cf Ngaldaddubbe\
\\ce Mythical female honey spirit being with one leg cut off. Also placename on the Liverpool RIver upstream from Kabulwarnamyo.\
\\xv Yi-berddubbe!\
\\ce (insult idiom) You dickhead!\
\\cf bengdubberran\
\\ce to forget\
\\cf mirrhdubbe\
\\ce blunt (of cutting blades)\
\\sn 2\
\\ge blocked\
\\re blocked off, dense\
\\de Blocked, impeding passage.\
\\xv Nga-kebdubbe.\
\\xe My nose is blocked.\
\\xv An-berrkdubbe.\
\\xe Dense forest, difficult to walk through.\
\\xv Ka-warddedubbe.\
\\xe Rough dissected sandstone country with many large boulders making travel very difficult or impossible.\
\\xv Nga-djarlandubbe.\
\\xe I am unable to urinate. [fv:djarlan 'bladde' fv:dubbe 'blocked']\
\\cf Ka-kodjdubbebun.\
\\ce Ending of a watercourse at its headwaters.\
\\cf Ka-rredjdubbedurndeng.\
\\ce dead-end section of a stream, attached to the main watercourse as an appendix shape\
\
\\lx dubbebakke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge make.platform\
\\re make sleeping platform\
\\de Make a sleeping platform.\
\\xv Ka-rrubbebakke ka-yo.\
\\xe She's making a platform to sleep.\
\
\\lx dubbedong\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.impassable\
\\re be impassable\
\\de Be unable to pass through a place because of impenetrable rock or vegetation. \
\\xv Karri-dubbedong minj bale karri-yime? \
\\xe We can\'92t pass through, it\'92s impenetrable, what can we do? \
\\sy -mikkendong, -ngalkwarredong\
\\dt 01/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx dubbeken\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\ps n. \
\\ge impassable place\
\\re impassable feature or environment (bush, rocks)\
\\de Rock country or thicket/bush which is impenetrable.\
\\sd geographic\
\
\\lx dubberran\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge become.dysfunctional\
\\re become dysfunctional (of physical senses etc)\
\\de Become dysfunctional (of physical senses) or blocked; become blunt (of cutting blades).\
\\xv Med, nga-bengdubberranj.\
\\xe Hang on, I've forgotten (can't think of it).\
\\xv Nga-kebdubberranj.\
\\xe My nose is blocked.\
\
\\lx Dubbun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx duberrk\
\\ps n.\
\\re mussel sp.\
\\de Kind of freshwater mussel.\
\\xv Duberrk, nayuhyungki ngalbu banguni. Yibengkan duberrk kumekke kang ngalanjhkurrmeng kakurrme. Nungkah duberrk nawu kadarrkid kadjenbebme.\
\\xe Duberrk mussels, the first people ate them. You know that she [Ngalyangdoh spirit being] took them and placed them [into the watercourses], she [still] places them. That duberrk mussel that has a tongue that pokes out.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 25/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx dubirrah\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Polymeria.ambigua\
\\re fi:Polymeria_ambigua\
\\de A small creeper/vine with pink flowers. Note that both fv:dubirrah and fv:andubirrahdubirrah both refer to similar kinds of small shrubs with similar pink flowers.\
\\sc Polymeria ambigua\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\
\\lx dubirrah\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cooking.tool\
\\re tool used for cooking in fire\
\\de A tool similar in shape to a spear thrower used to rake coals and ashes in order to dig depressions and cover over food to be cooked.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 27/Jul/2012\
\
\\lx Dubirrah\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Billabong on Kubumi waterhole on Mann River.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx dubirrahdubirrah\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Pachynema.complanatum\
\\re fi:Pachynema_complanatum\
\\de A small leafless shrub (.5-1.5m)\
\\sc Pachynema complanatum\
\\uv Djnj\
\\cf dubirrah\
\\ce fi:Polymeria_ambigua\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_sublanata\
\\de A kind of acacia shrub, either erect or prostrate. Known in Kuninjku dialect as fv:mandubirrahdubirrah, the name fv:andubirrahdubirrah is used in Kundedjnjenghmi to refer to fi:Pachynema_complanatum.\
\\uv I\
\\sy Some Kuninjku speakers call this plant fv:manmiri but other speakers dispute this as a correct name.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx duddji\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de sacred ceremonial objects wrapped up in paper-bark, cloth or in a suitcase.\
\\ee A collection of sacred objects known as fv:duddji is hidden away from the view of women, children and uninitiated males.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dudje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.bury in the ground 2.plant\
\\xv Na-kudji biyawo doweng, ngayi nga-karuy nga-dudji.\
\\xe A cat died so I dug a hole and buried it.\
\\pdn kk= kamukke\
\
\\lx dudjendi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de buried, lying under the ground\
\
\\lx dudjmi\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge green.plum\
\\re green plum\
\\re fi:Buchanania_obovata\
\\de green plum tree (taller variety, shorter variety is called fv:(m)an-wodberr)\
\\xv Birri-doy man-dudjmi. Ya birri-kang kondanj dabborrabbolk wanjh ngandi-bukkang ngadberre wanjh ngarrih-doy manih manbu kun-wardde.\
\\xe They used to pound the green plum. Our ancestors from this place showed us and so we continued [the tradition] of pounding them here on this rock.\
\\xv An-dudjmi ka-rrong ka-rrong ka-rere anbu makka wodberr mane ka-wohdengebarrarn ka-rrulkmelme wanjh ka-mankan  borrb borrb borrb borrb wanjh kah-djalngun ka-djalngun ka-dolhme. Lerre ka-rrerrehme al-buyika albu kabi-kadjung  kabani-djarrkngun kabani-yakwon kabani-yawoyhderrehme ku-buyika kabani-ngun kabani-bekkan kabani-djalnguklurlme  kukku-kah wanjh kabani-re might be ka-bongun konda Balbalk.\
\\xe It strikes the fi:Buchanania_obovata tree repeatedly, the short variety of the tree and with the space in between its toes it kicks the tree  and the fruit fall down plop plop plop plop and then it eats them all and puts its head up again. Then another might join it  and together they eat and finish it all, they move off to another tree and when they hear their bellies have swollen up they go off for water, such as here at Balbalk.\
\\ee edible fruit which can be eaten as is, dried, or pounded into a mash, stem chewed for tooth ache, leaf chewed and juice swallowed for stomach pain\
\\sc Buchanania obovata\
\\uv I, W, Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur E= man-moyi\
\\sy (m)an-wodberr\
\\pdn kk= man-kordildil\
\\sd plant\
\\p DCS00043_1.jpg, anwodberr Buchanania obovata.5.jpg\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx duhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de puncture, make a hole in something, penetrate\
\
\\lx duhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de punctured (eg. a tyre), container with leakage\
\
\\lx Dukaladjarranj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de crossing on Cadell River, site of Mandarrk's (Balang Na-Barabba) famous large painting of Bolung\
the rainbow serpent which he painted there in 1965. In fv:Balngarra clan estate.\
\\uv Kune/Dangbon\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dukkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.tie up, wrap with string/rope or cloth, tie a knot.\
\\xv Birri-dukkayi birri-darr(kid)dukkayi birri-doyi and birri-dukkayihkayi, ya birri-dukkayi.\
\\xe They used to tie them up (packages of stone tools), they'd fashion them (ie. strike stone to produce\
stone tools) and carry the tied up packages, yes they used to tie them up.\
\\xv Birri-kinjeng rowk wanjh birri-barndad-dukkang rowk wanjh birri-dedj-bom rowk.\
\\xe They burned it all (the fur of the kangaroo) and then they tied up its legs and cut it all open.\
\\de 2. grab with arms and hold tightly\
\\xv 'Yoh, ka-mak nga-karrme. Ka-mak yi-nan nga-karrme', kunekke ka-yime. 'Nga-karrme\
nakka nga-djorrh-dukkan. La yi-ray ngudda wanjh.'\
\\xe 'Yes, it's OK, I've got him. You go and look, I'll hold on to him', he was saying like this.'I've got him,\
I'm holding him around the waist with my arms. You go then.'\
\\pdn kk= durrbidme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dukkarren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de 1.Tie clothes onto the body\
\\xv Man-burrba yi-dedj-dukkarrimen!\
\\xe Tie up your naga!\
\\de 2.Tie self into a coil (snakes),writhe.\
\\xv Birri-buyika minj balemane birri-bebmeninj, bonj birri-ruy birri-doweng\
birri-dukkarrukkarrinj.\
\\xe Some of the others had no where to get away and so in the end were burned, writhing to death.\
\\pdn kk= dulbidmerren\
\\cf djen-dukkarrinj\
\\ce tongue tied\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dukkayindi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de bound up, tied up with string/rope.\
\\uv W=bongdi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dukkurrh\
\\ps adj.\
\\de short in length\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= dedjdjumbung.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dukkurrhbun\
\\ps v.\
\\ge finish.ceremony\
\\re finish a ceremony\
\\de Bring a long standing ceremony to a close; complete the last section of a long regional ceremony.\
\\sd ceremony\
\
\\lx durrkmirri\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge work\
\\re work\
\\de Work. The word may have its origin in ceremonial contexts where social categories of people were designated as 'workers' which involved 'pulling up' (thus fv:durrk) every piece of vegetation to clear ceremonial grounds. The word now applies to modern concepts of employment and other aspects of work.\
\\xv Ngarri-durndi Manedjangkarirra, birri-marnbom shop, kun-kod dorengh birri-marnbom. Clinic, office birri-marnbom kun-kod dorengh. Ngarri-wam, ngarri-durrkmirri.\
\\xe We returned to Maningrida and they constructed the shop, made from paperbark. They made a clinic and office from paperbark. We went [there] and we worked there.\
\\mr durrk 'tug/pull out'+mi 'gerundivizer'+di 'stand'\
\\dt 14/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx dukno\
\\cf see fv:rdukno\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dukula\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge brushtail.possum\
\\re northern brushtail possum\
\\re possum, northern brushtail\
\\re fi:Trichosurus_arnhemensis\
\\de Northern brushtail possum.\
\\sc Trichosurus arnhemensis\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj, W= djebuyh, E= durrih\
\\sn 2\
\\ge dunnart.sp.\
\\re red-cheeked dunnart\
\\re fi:Sminthopsis_virginiae_nitela\
\\de Red-cheeked dunnart\
\\sc Sminthopsis virginiae nitela\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Dukurrdji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of the Kunibidji patriclan on which the settlement of Maningrida is located, and surrounding region\
\\xv Korroko yiman dabborrabbolk kunekke birri-yimeng birri-yiraworrinj bedberre bad birri-nang bedberre kure\
ka-bolkburnbun, ngudman birri-yimeninj 'Konda ngudman Marlbbarrdji ngadman kurebeh Kamulkbarn. Yiman kure\
ngad kurebeh bedda Manengkarerrben and Duk\'farrdji kabirri-yiraworren kakkak-kakkak kabirri-yimerren o\
djongok-djongok birri-raworrinj dabborrabbolk korroko. Birri-ningihni.\
\\xe A long time ago, the old people (ancestors) would say that they shared all of the neighbouring country, but they could identify where a clan estate finished and acknowledged that the next area belonged to another clan saying 'This is your Marlbbarrdji clan land and we Kamulkbarn [own this part]. And the same for us on the other side [of the Liverpool River], those Menengkarerrben clan people and the Duk\'farrdji people all join together because their mother's mothers or spouses' parents come from that other clan [with whom they share] and so that's how the old people joined together [to share their estates long ago]. They all lived together [on each other's country]. \
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\\lx dukurruhme\
\\ps n.\
\\de be covered in many small skin sores\
\
\\lx dulbidmerren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de tie self up (eg. tie on a naga)\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dukkarren\
\\xv Korrh yi-modmen yi-rrulbidmerren yi-rrarrkarrhmen.\
\\xn Man-burrba yi-ma yi-dukkarren yi-borrkkemen.\
\\xe Get a loin cloth, tie it up on yourself and dance.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx dulbume\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de flock of birds flying away from the ground.\
\
\\lx dule\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.song\
\\de 2. accent in speech\
\\xv Bedda man-dule-buyika kabirri-wokdi.\
\\xe Those people have a different accent in the way they talk.\
\
\\lx dule-balanhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de miss a word when talking too fast, trip over one's own words\
\\xv Bu karri-djen-dukkarren karri-dulebalanhme.\
\\xe If we get tongue tied we can miss a word.\
\
\\lx dulebukkan\
\\ps v.t\
\\de reveal a song to someone, teach someone a song.\
\\xv Man-kordang bi-rrule-bukkang.\
\\xe The clever man (sorcerer) showed him the song.\
\
\\lx duledjurrkdjurrk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de very fast speech\
\\xv Man-dule-djurrkdjurrk ka-wokdi.\
\
\\lx dulemang\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de have a song, learn a song\
\\xv ...dule-mey rumburre, yoh, bakkerrinj nungka rumburre. Bakkerrinj ya, rumburre\
yi-bengkan ngarri-kadjuy boyen.\
\\xe The dreaming being Rumburre has a song, yes, he composed it Rumburre did, you know that song we\
sang before?\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dulemardadahme\
\\de perform a smoking ceremony to ritually cleanse a repertoire of songs which were sung by someone\
who has just died. Whilst the songs are being performed, ironwood leaves are burnt and the smoke is\
waved over the songman and didjeridu player.\
\\sy dule-mardadakinje\
\\nt check spelling of synonym.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Dulerayek\
\\ps n.\
\\de Kune Dule-rayek is a term for a speech variety of the Kune dialect used by the speakers themselves to\
describe their own dialect variety which is spoken by Rembarrnga-Kune bilinguals at communities such\
as Buluh Karduru, Bolkdjam and Ankabarrbirri south of Maningrida.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Dulhma\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de Site on an upper branch of Mandedjkadjang Creek (Muralidbar Creek), near a creek confluence around 35km southwest (upstream) of where the creek crosses the Gunbalanya to Maningrida road. \uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx dulk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ee (agrees with 'man-' class eg. kun-dulk man-kimuk 'a big tree')\
\\ps n\
\\sd plant\
\\de 1. tree (generic), stick, log.\
\\de 2.any non-traditional wooden object eg. coffin.\
\\pdn kk= kun-muluru\
\\cf ku-rrulkwern\
\\ce bush landscape\
\\dt 08/May/2007\
\
\\lx dulk\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp\
\\re fi:Acacia_sp.\
\\de a kind of Acacia tree with silky blue-green leaves, sometimes called fish poison wattle or soapy wattle\
\\xv Wanjh ngarri-monghme kure man-dulk wanjh yorndidj namekke wanjh ngarri-yameng.\
\\xe Then we would mould the iron wood resin on and fit the quartzite point and use it to spear [game].\
\\so Tom Noydduna\
\\ee Used to make spear shafts and sometimes the leaves used as an ichthycide.\
\\sc Acacia holosericia\
\\uv E (man-dulk), Djnj (an-dulk)\
\\ur I=man-delkngerre\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx dulkarre\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge power\
\\re power\
\\de Power.\
\\cf ka-dulkarrekimuk\
\\ce powerful\
\\xv Namarrkon ka-dulkarrekimuk.\
\\xe The lightning spirit is powerful.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx dulkarreyakwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge overcome, defeat\
\\re overcome, defeat\
\\de Overcome, defeat.\
\\xv Ngarrben-dulkarreyakwong.\
\\xe We overcame them, defeated them.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx Dulkkengemeng\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on the walking route through the Kunburray estate, from Mikawake through to Kamanemdi.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx dulmuk\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\re heavy\
\\de Heavy.\
\\xv Nga-nang djorrhlurlmeng djarre ngorrmey ngalekke ngurrurdu ngal-dulmuk duninj ngalekke mayh.\
\\xe I saw that he had a bulge in his hip from carrying that really heavy emu a long way.\
\\xv Ma, wanjh nganabbarru ngarri-dulubom kun-kurlah. An-dalk ngarri-dulubom kure and djad area Kunbarlanja kure ngamed Nginjbirr ngarri-dulubom Ngara ngarri-dulubom kun-kurlah ngarri-kuk-yilkbuni nawu kun-kurlah nawu ngarri-mangi but truck no murrikang kan-yikarrmi ngadberre kun-kurlah but nawu yi-bengkan dulmuk nganabbarru, na-rangem ngal-daluk.\
\\xe So then, we shot buffaloes for their hides. We shot them in the grass and near Kunbarlanja at Nginjbirr and Ngara. We shot them for the hides which we removed and had to carry because there was no trucks to pick us up with the buffalo skins and you know, buffaloes are very heavy, both the males and females.\
\\sn 2\
\\re complex matter, serious matter\
\\de A complex or serious matter.\
\\dt 25/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx ngal-dulmuk\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\re heavy\
\\de Heavy (of female things).\
\\xv Nga-nang djorrhlurlmeng djarre ngorrmey ngalekke ngurrurdu ngal-dulmuk duninj ngalekke mayh.\
\\xe I saw that he had a bulge in his hip from carrying that really heavy emu a long way.\
\\dt 25/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx dulubun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de shoot, spear, penetrate\
\\xv dengedulubom\
\\xe punctured tyre/foot\
\
\\lx Dulubungdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de Site on an upper branch of Mandedjkadjang Creek (Muralidbar Creek) in the Kunukdi estate. It is in the very upper reaches of the creek, only around 12km east of the Goomadeer River at the Kabbari complex. There is an important long yam site on this creek. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx dulum\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de hill, mountain, elevated landform.\
\
\\lx dumanj\
\\pr ngal-/na-\
\\ps n\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, e.g. my wife, your sister's child, we are fv:na-kurrng. My 'wife', your daughter, you are my nephew (ZS or classificatory equivalent). \
\\cn yi-manjmeng.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dumdum\
\\va djumdjum\
\\ps n.\
\\ge beetle\
\\re beetle\
\\de various kinds of scarab beetles and darkling beetles\
\\uv E= manwurrkeng\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx dume\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de lower back\
\
\\lx Dumebey\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx dume-dukkarren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de tie at the back\
\\xv Nameke nakka na-kare 'old fashioned one' nani nawu 'Aboriginal one' ngarri-djongburrinj\
ngarri-dume-dukkarrinj and ngarri-burlnjinhdi.\
\\xe That's an old fashioned Aboriginal way of dressing, we used to put those on and tie them around our\
backs and wear what is called 'burlnjinh' (a pubic covering).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dumekan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de follow behind a moving fire line when using fire to hunt or burn off\
\\xv Karri-dumekan man-wurrk.\
\\xe We'll follow behind the fire line.\
\
\\lx dumeno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sd geographic\
\\de 1. lower back\
\\de 2. the outer bank of a meandering watercourse\
\\cf -bodume, -dumekan.\
\
\\lx Dumerrbobo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Marlirri clan estate\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dumeyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de where a river or watercourse has a wide outer bank on a meander.\
\\xv Ka-re kaddu:m wanjh Duleburreni Ngaldaddubbe Djabidj Bakoluy kare konda\
kabalhdurndeng kaddum ka-bale mani an-bolh ka-dumeyo-ken ngaleng bono.\
\\xe It goes upstream to the places Duleburreni Ngaldaddubbe and Djabidj Bakoluy and here it keeps going back up to where the river meanders into a wide outer bank.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx dumuk\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re broad-leaved native cherry\
\\re fi:Exocarpus_latifolius\
\\de broad-leaved native cherry\
\\sc Exocarpus latifolius\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-djindju\
\\p DSC01906, andumuk/Exocarpus latifol2\
\\sn 2\
\\re northern sandalwood\
\\re fi:Santalum_lanceolatum\
\\de northern sandalwood\
\\ee Bininj Kunwok speakers regard northern sandalwood and broad-leaved native cherry as being very similar in many respects and so\
they share the same name. In addition, Kuninjku speakers also include fi:Acacia_limbata as a type of fv:man-dumuk because of\
similarities in the shape of the leaves.\
\\sc Santalum lanceolatum\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\ur\
\\sn 3\
\\re Acacia_limbata\
\\de kind of Acacia, slender, glabrous shrub, 0.4\'962 m high, grows in sandstone country, in gravelly or sand sheet soils or stony hillsides, in\
open eucalypt woodlands, yellow flowers throughout the dry season\
\\sc Acacia limbata\
\\uv I\
\\ur\
\\so Bill Birriyabirriya\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\\lx dumurluh\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of sandstone country bloodwood eucalyptus, similar to fi:Corymbia_polycarpa but different.\
\\xv An-dumurluh ka-rrangen kurorrbo, an-werrkkimuk.\
\\xe The fv:an-dumurluh tree is found near creeks and has thick/large pieces of bark.\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_sp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx dundulubun\
\\va durndulubun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Penetrate in many places e.g. new shoots of grass growing up (piercing the ground) or whiskers appearing on someone's face, new buds appearing on a branch.\
\\xv Ngun-dundulubun yi-djawurrkbebme.\
\\xe Your whiskers are growing.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx duninj\
\\ps adj.\
\\de really, actual, 'really one', proper\
\\xv Wurdurd ngurri-na ngaleng ka-bengkan ka-borrkke duninj.\
\\xe Look you kids she knows how to dance the proper way.\
\\xv Woybukki duninj\
\\xe Really true.\
\
\\lx dung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de speak roughly, swear, get angry with someone\
\\sy rid-dung.\
\\pdn kk= -ngangarrbun\
\
\\lx dung\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.sun (belongs to the 'ngal-' noun class)\
\\de 2. time\
\\de 3. clock/watch\
\\de 4. solar panel\
\\pdn kk= ngal-djarala\
\\cf fv:-dungre\
\\ce sun is moving\
\\xv werrk dungwam\
\\xe hurry up, time is gone.\
\
\\lx dungala\
\\ps n.\
\\de honey type\
\\uv Djnj (some speakers say this word is merely a synonym for 'lorlbban' and is used by\
eastern and western dialects)\
\\sy lorlbban\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Dungalibbi (Dhungalibbi)\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de river camp near Korlobidahdah in Marlirri clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dungbebme\
\\ps v.\
\\de sun appears ie. daybreak or from behind clouds\
\
\\lx dung-borledme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de afternoon\
\\pdn kk= djarala-dordedjme\
\
\\lx dungkurdme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de twitch, the jerking of a muscle\
\
\\lx dung-mirrhmirrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de heat shimmer\
\\xv Ka-dung-mirrhmirrhme.\
\\xe It's shimmering in the heat.\
\
\\lx dungre\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.passing of time 2. movement of the sun across the sky\
\
\\lx dung-wakwan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sleep in, sleep late into the morning\
\\lit 'forget the sun'.\
\
\\lx dungyibme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de setting of the sun\
\\xv Na-kudji wam djangkang, nang dungyibmeng wanjh keleminj.\
\\xe A man went out hunting, saw that the sun had set and became frightened.\
\
\\lx durlhdurlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1. knocking or banging sound eg. knock on a door or rain falling on a roof and making noise\
\\xv Warde yi-rrang-durlhdurlmen.\
\\xe Try and knock on the door.\
\\de 2. stomp on the ground making a thumping sound\
\\xv Yun ngurri-durlhdurlme wardi djenj ka-re.\
\\xe Don't stomp on the ground or else the fish will go away.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Durlmangkarr\
\\va Dulmangkarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de clan name name of a patriclan on the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Ngalkirdimu, ka-barrarn ngaleng yi-nan kunu Bod Kadjangdi, yoh an-barrarn. Makka wanjh na-Burdohken. Kilhken\
na-rrurlmangkarr karrkad na-Rol karrkad koyek.  Kure Durlmangkarrken dulumno ya karrkad kure yirridjdja\
na-Rolken .\
\\xe At Ngalkirdimu, there is a gorge you can see, that's Bod Kadjangdi, yes a gorge. That's then for the Burdoh clan. The lower area [in the\
catchment] is Durlmangkarr and up on top to the east is Rol clan. The hills there are for Durlmangkarr but once you're on top that's\
fi:yirridjdja moiety Rol estate.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx dunbuhmanj\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge sooty.grunter\
\\re black bream\
\\re sooty grunter\
\\re fi:Hephaestus_fuliginosus\
\\de Sooty grunter, also known as black bream.\
\\sc Hephaestus fuliginosus\
\\sn 2\
\\de Jenkins' grunter.\
\\sc Hephaestus jenkinsi\
\\uv I\
\\uv W= narrud, Djnj syn.= nakerdmi, Kdj= nakerdmi, kalarrk\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx durndeng\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1.go back, return\
\\xv Yim-durnde!\
\\xe Come back here!\
\\xv Korroko birri-durndi.\
\\xe They've already gone back.\
\\de 2. In Kune dialect, there is no use of the directional'-m-' marker as in Kuninjku. Thus, in Kune,\
fv:yi-durnde! may mean either 'come back' or 'go back'. The meaning is made clear by the context.\
\\pdn kk= -warnduyhme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx durndiwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1.return with, take back.\
\\de 2.rewind (cassette player)\
\\xv Yi-durndiwemen kun-kudji karri-bekkan.\
\\xe Rewind it and let's listen to it one more time.\
\
\\lx durnhdurnhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hollow thumping noise eg. of ground above a cavity or underground body of water.\
\\xv Bulanj yim-ray yi-bekka yi-melmen ka-bolk-durnhdurnhme.\
\\xe fv:Bulanj come here and stomp and listen to the ground make a hollow thumping noise.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx duruk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de dog\
\\pdn kk= djungdjungh\
\
\\lx Duruk Berlbakmeng\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Plain on the banks of the upper Goomadeer River. This site is located around 18km south (upstream) of the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 and \'91Goomadeer\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River, where the river travels through a wide gorge. The site name means literally \'91dog broken arm\'92.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Duruk Maddjardahmeng\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on Mann River north of Manmoyi. Literally: 'Dog's ankle got stuck'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Duruk Kabadyorrkbun\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate a few hundred metres upstream from Yikarrakkal and next to Kabarrebarre. Usually referred to as just fv:Kabadyorrkbun.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx durukmud\
\\hm 1\
\\ps n.\
\\mr duruk+mud 'dog+fur/feathers'\
\\ge heron\
\\re Rufous night heron\
\\re fi:Nycticorax_caledonicus\
\\de Rufous night heron.\
\\sc Nycticorax caledonicus\
\\sd bird\
\\uv I\
\\ur W, Djnj= kawk\
\
\\lx durukmud\
\\hm 2\
\\ps n.\
\\ge moth.sp.\
\\re moth species\
\\de Kind of moth.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 01/May/2007\
\
\\lx Durukngarkmeng\
\\lit 'Dog drowned'\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de dog dreaming site in fv:Dankorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx durrbidme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Tie up.\
\\xv Man-yurrun karri-durrbidme.\
\\xn Kun-yarl karri-dukkan.\
\\xe Let's tie it up with string.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dukkan\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx durrbidmerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de tie up on self\
\\xv Karri-kumadj-durrbidmerren kondah.\
\\xn Karri-kom-dukkarren kondah.\
\\xe We tie up our necks here.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dukkarren\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx Durrbu Wakeng\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place name in Birrirddak Creek region. Literally means \'91the water goanna crawled\'92.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx durren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de argue\
\\xv Njale kenh birri-durrinj?\
\\xe What were they fighting about?\
\\pdn kk= ngarnarrbonghmerren\
\
\\lx durrih\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge brushtail.possum\
\\re northern brushtail possum\
\\re fi:Trichosurus_arnhemensis\
\\de Northern brushtail possum\
\\sc Trichosurus arnhemensis\
\\sy dukula\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj, W= djebuyh\
\\sn 2\
\\ge dunnart.sp.\
\\re red-cheeked dunnart\
\\re |fi\{Sminthopsis virginiae nitela\}\
\\de Red-cheeked dunnart\
\\sc Sminthopsis virginiae nitela\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx durrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 1. tug, short pull\
\\xv Yi-dedjmaddurrkme\
\\xe pull out the roots (of a plant).\
\\de 2. attempt to obtain someone as a companion\
\\xv Wardi yi-rrurrkmen Kamarrang.\
\\xe Try and get Kamarrang to go with you.\
\
\\lx durruyurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ground.sign\
\\re ground mark used as directional sign\
\\de ground mark in the form of a line made by dragging the foot indicating the direction of those travelling to a particular destination\
\\xv Durruyurrk kabirri-yorrohme ba kabirri-burrbun bale kabirri-re.\
\\dt 17/May/2012\
\
\\lx duwa\
\\ps n.\
\\de one of the two patrilineal moiety names, the other being fv:yirridjdja\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx duyhno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\ps n.\
\\de plant tubers beneath the ground\
\\cf -duyhme\
\\ce grow a tuber.\
\\uv I\
\\uv E= kukno.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx D\'fab\'fahdarrh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Marrku clan estate\
\\uv Dangbon\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx dja\
\\ps conj\
\\re and\
\\de Conjunction and clause linking \'91and\'92.\
\\xv \
\\xe\
\
\\lx djabarnda\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Children's Python\
\\sc Liasis childreni\
\\ee Ku-rrulk ka-barndi, man-nguy ka-ngun.\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= mod\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djabarraboy\
\\va djabiboy, djaboyboy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de name of mythical black rock kangaroo held as a pet by fv:mimih spirits.\
\\xv Mimih kabi-ngeyhngeybun 'djabarraboy, djabarraboy, djabarraboy'.\
\\xe fv:Mimih spirits call out his name 'djabarraboy, djabarraboy, djabarraboy'.\
\
\\lx djabarrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de String bag (W) but in Kundedjwarre clan lect is a synonym for fv:kun-madj 'basket, swag, clothes etc'\
\\uv W\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 14/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djabbanano\
\\va kun-djabbana\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de horns, such as those of a buffalo or the rainbow serpent\
\\xv Ngal-bu ngalyod ngal-bu 'horn' ka-karrme djabbanano.\
\\xe But the rainbow serpent, she's got horns.\
\
\\lx djabbanmani\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de ceremonial structure of two forked sticks connecting by a beam decorated with green\
branches at which a public rite is performed on the final morning of the Kunabibi\
ceremony. Initiates sit under the structure holding the cross beam in imitation of\
flying foxes. A fv:kakkawarr or ceremonial messenger sits on top on each of the\
forked posts.\
\\dt 12/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djabbilarna\
\\ps n.\
\\de metal container, billy can\
\\bw from Malay se-belanga 'one earthen cooking pot' or Makassarese balanga 'earthen cooking pot'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djabbo\
\\va djabboy, djabboh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de northern (spotted) quoll\
\\sc Dasyurus hallucatus\
\\uv E, I\
\\ur Rembarrnga, Dangbon =yulukyuluk, Kdj, W= njanjma\
\\pdn kk = yulukyuluk\
\\en duwa moiety, associated with the Kunabibi ceremony\
\\ee The quoll is a mythological villain who fought with the Moon man. The quoll wanted humans to die once and for all, but the Moon said there should be rebirth. They went their seperate ways, the quoll dying like all creatures but the moon rose up to be reborn every month. Today the curled up claw of the quoll is a symbol for death.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djabbo\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge blade.type\
\\re type of stone blade\
\\de Type of stone blade made from a particular kind of red quartzite.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge quartzite.type\
\\re type of quartzite\
\\de Red quartzite type from which the eponymous stone blades are made\
\\sd material_culture\
\
\\lx djabdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 1. an elongate object standing on its base 2. travel directly to the destination without stopping, "straight\
up ka-re".\
\\xv Ka-djabdi lorrkkon.\
\\xe The bone pole is standing upright.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djabdi\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place in upright position\
\\xv Yi-berd-djabdi man-korle! (transitive?)\
\\xe Hold the spear by the end!\
\\xv Djarrang kabirri-djurlng-djabdi.\
\\xe The horses are leaving a trail of dust.\
\
\\lx djabedj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_aulacocarpa\
\\de kind of yellow flowering Acacia tree\
\\sc Acacia aulacocarpa\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur Djnj= an-djewe\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djabelh\
\\va djabel\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mouth.almighty\
\\re mouth almighty fish\
\\re fi:Glossamia_aprion\
\\de Mouth Almighty.\
\\sc Glossamia aprion\
\\uv W, Kdj, Kundedjwarre clan lect\
\\uv I= djenjbarrang\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djaberle\
\\ps n. (no prefix)\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de yam knife made from the shoulder blade bone of a kangaroo.\
\
\\lx djaberle\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djaberleno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de shoulder blade\
\
\\lx djabiboy\
\\cf see fv:djabarraboy\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djabinj\
\\va berddjabinj\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge uncircumcised\
\\re uncircumcised\
\\de uncircumcised\
\\xv Mane kanjdjikanjdji karrihkarri. Nakka djabinj ngarri-yime djabinj nawu\
an-kuk, berddjabinj. \
\\xe Here in the western area closer to the coast (lowlands). They [the fv:Nakorrkko mythological heroes] were at that stage uncircumcised, we say fv:djabinj to mean uncircumcised 'unripe', an uncircumcised penis.\
\\xv Djabinj bani-reyi, nani bani-daykani karrkad , nawu kodjbangko Bulanj,\
Kodjok bani-reyi. \
\\xe Those two (the Nakorrkko) they were (at first) uncircumcised and they were circumcised when they went up to the plateau, those two\
wild men Bulanj and Kodjok were travelling.\
\\sd body part\
\\so Bardayal Nadjamerrek\
\\an ka-lakkayenyo, daykan (ka-rraykan)\
\\sy djebelh, minj ka-rraykan\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx djabname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge place.elongateOBJ\
\\re place elongate object\
\\de place an elongate object on its end, place into the ground (such as a pole or a stick)\
\\xv Yi-rrulkdjabnamen wanjh yi-rrukka midjikked.\
\\xe Place some sticks in the ground and tie up your mosquito net.\
\\xv Nganabbarru korddjabdjabnameng.\
\\xe The buffalo defaecated creating a big pile of shit.\
\\cf barlahdjabname\
\\ce (of reptiles) leave a long straight sliding track\
\\dt 19/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx djabu\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re conical fish trap\
\\re fish trap\
\\de Conical fish traps woven from fi:Trophis_scandens vine.\
\\sd material_culture\
\
\\lx djabulhdjabulh\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge wild.tomato\
\\re wild tomato\
\\re fi:Solanum_echinatum, fi:Solanum_asymmetricphyllum\
\\de Various Solanum shrubs with 'big tucker like tomato', eaten by kangaroos.\
\\sc Solanum echinatum, Solanum asymmetricphyllum\
\\sn 2\
\\de Scrambling burr, round with long spikes\
\\xv Man-djabulhdjabulh kan-denge-dulubun.\
\\xe The scrambling beach burr\
\\uv E, I.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djabulhdjabulh\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Solanum.sp.\
\\re fi:Solanum_sp.\
\\de wild tomato\
\\xv Nuye djabulhdjabulh barrk djukerre kamimburdme dja ka-ngun.\
\\xe That's his food, the black wallaroo, which it eats with its eyes closed.\
\\sc Solanum echinatum\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur I, E= mandjabulhdjabulh\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Djabulu\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Djabulu is a site on a small creek in the Maburrinj estate which flows downstream (north) to Yidakdak and the Madjannngalkku fv:delek mine. The site is south-east of an elbow in the Goomadeer River, where it makes a sharp right-angle turn to the north following the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches. There is fv:delek at Djabulu as well as fv:kunrodjbe (red ochre) which is said to be quite distinct from other ochres. No one should take ochre from these places without permission. A small hill around a kilometre southeast of Djabulu may be a Dreaming site for fv:mankodjbang fi:Aponogeton_elongatus. \
\\xv Madjanngalkku-beh Yidakdak-beh kawanjdjadduluburren kure Djabulu.\
\\xe From Madjanngalkku and Yidakdak (downstream) there is a confluence of small tributaries at Djabulu (upstream).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djad\
\\pr man-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de straight, proper, correct\
\\xv djen-djad\
\\xe one who speaks well, many languages or learns language easily.\
\\cf denge-djad\
\\ce good kicker (football).\
\\xv Denge-djad nanih.\
\\xe He's a good kick (with a football).\
\
\\lx djadberlhberlh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge red-shouldered.parrot\
\\re red-shouldered parrot\
\\re fi:Aprosmictus_erythropterus\
\\de Red shouldered parrot. Some Kuninjku speakers say this is the fv:duwa fv:kun-walidjaw lect name. Other Kuninjku call this bird fv:werleyh (e.g. fv:kun-wallakkud lect) and some Kundedjnjenghmi speakers also use the name fv:djadberlhberlh for the northern rosella which is called fv:djaddokorddokord in Kuninjku.\
\\sc Aprosmictus erythropterus\
\\uv I, Kdj, W\
\\uv \
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Djadberlhberlhm\'9crniruy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\lit "Red shouldererd parrot got burnt on the shoulders"\
\\ee m\'farnino =shoulder (E,D) (the u in murnino is ubar) moneno =shoulder (I)\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djadbirnalk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.name\
\\re spinifex sp.\
\\de kind of rock country spinifex similar to fv:an-karne\
\\sc Triodia sp.?\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djaddal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de outer fibres of bark from fv:man-barlanjdja, Eucalyptus miniata, used for kindling.\
\\sy djalk\
\
\\lx djaddedde\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grasshopper\
\\re grasshopper\
\\de Generic term for common grasshoppers.\
\\xv Djaddedde ka-ngun kun-malaworr. Ku-bolkwern ngarrben-nan.\
\\xe Grasshoppers eat leaves. You can see them anywhere.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 15/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djaddi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge frog\
\\re frog (generic)\
\\de Green Tree Frog, also generic for all frogs\
\\sc Litorea caerulea\
\\uv I, Kdj, E\
\\ur E= (syn.) kodwong-kodwong, W= kordbolbok\
\\xv Man-djewk ka-djakdung djaddi 'noise' ka-marnbun 'kodwong-kodwong'.\
\\xe In the wet season the frogs make noise 'gotwong-gotwong'.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Djaddibakmeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de fishing place on Tomkinson River flood plain in fv:Dankorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx djaddokorddokord\
\\va djardakorddokkord\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rosella.sp.\
\\sn 1\
\\re northern rosella\
\\de Northern rosella.\
\\sc Platycercus venustus\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= djikkilirri\
\\sn 2\
\\re hooded parrot\
\\de Hooded parrot (rare).\
\\sc Psephotus dissimilis\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djadme\
\\va djaddjadme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\re criticise\
\\re set straight\
\\de Set straight, correct, speak one\'92s mind on a controvertial topic, be critical of someone. Reduplicated form can have a plural sense.\
\\xv Nga-bendjaddjadme.\
\\xe I'll set them all straight.\
\\sn 2\
\\re straighten\
\\de Straighten.\
\\dt 11/Nov/2016\
\
\\lx Djaddjarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de a mythological evil spirit\
\\xv Djaddjarr wayarra munun ka-yo, na-bang namekke, ku-kulbbinj mak ku-lohlorrk ka-yo.\
\\xe Djaddjarr is a demon who sleeps in dark places and is dangerous, he sleeps in termite mounds or\
hollow logs.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djadmud\
\\pr na-, ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge unmarried\
\\re unmarried\
\\de Unmarried man/woman.\
\
\\lx djadngeredjngeredj\
\\ve ngeredjngeredj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.frog\
\\re northern dwarf tree frog\
\\re fi:Litoria_bicolor\
\\de Northern dwarf tree frog.\
\\sc Litoria bicolor\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 15/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djadj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djadjno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge digging.stick\
\\re digging stick\
\\de Digging stick, an implement associated with women.\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= kunkanin, W= kun-balkbu\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx djadjdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge birth.place.female\
\\re birth place of a girl/woman (v.i.)\
\\de Be the place where a woman/girl was born, literally 'digging stick stands' based on the custom of placing into the ground a digging stick to mark the birth place of a girl and a spear-thrower for a boy.\
\\xv Wurnkomku bu bedberre, Nawoberr dja njamed\'85 Dedjbang. Kodjdjan kah-djadjdi, Kodjdjan ngal-Wurnkomku.\
\\xe That place Nawoberr belongs to the Wurnkomku clan, and whatsit\'85 Dedjbang. That's where kodjdjan was born, Kodjdjan of the Wurnkomku clan.\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx djadjno\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial sticks painted brown with white tips and placed into the ground at the womens' Kunabibi dance ground. Later the women use the long sticks to beat the ground when they arrive to greet the men at the end of the Kunabibi ceremony.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djahdjangmodme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Go hunting.\
\\xv Karri-djahdjangmodme.\
\\xn Karri-djangkan.\
\\xe Let\'92s go hunting.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djangkan\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djahwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Arrive at a camp for some purpose; visit the camp of others with news or something to share.\
\\xv Kam-dokorrokmeng kam-kerridjahwohdjahwong, kayakki, benyawam.\
\\xe He came back quickly with the antbed for them but nothing, they were gone and he looked for them.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djahwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Search for.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde yawan\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djak\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sickness\
\\re sickness\
\\de sickness, disease\
\\xv Lanka kure bolk-Kalarrdju kun-djak djang kah-yo.\
\\xe At the place Lanka in Kalarrdju clan estate there is a sickness dreaming site.\
\\xv Nahni manimunak kah-dowen, kun-djak ka-karrme lead-beh, man-mim shotgun nguneng.\
\\xe This magpie goose is sick, it has disease from consuming shotgun lead [pellets].\
\
\\lx djak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge meat.ant\
\\re meat ant\
\\re northern meat ant\
\\re fi:Iridomyrmex_sanguineus\
\\de Northern meat ants.\
\\sc Iridomyrmex sanguineus\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/Jun/2010\
\
\\lx djakarndinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de saltwater catfish, possibly similar to fv:Arius midgleyi but also a term for small salmon-tailed catfish.\
\\ee the smaller specimens are called fv:djakarndinj and the larger ones fv:karrabbulyu.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djakbarlh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de wasp\
\
\\lx djakbekka\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de feel pain\
\
\\lx djakdung\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge rain.fall\
\\re rain fall down\
\\re fall (rain)\
\\de Fall (rain).\
\\xv Kaluk mandjewk djakdungi ka-kolhdebebme.\
\\xe After it has been raining, new shoots appear on the plants.\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx djakerr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de younger brother (address and referent), YB\
\
\\lx djakerr\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term with the basic meaning of 'your younger sibling'. There is a wide variety of kin relationships between speaker and addressee for which this term is appropriate and so the reciprocal term will vary depending on this relationship. A selection include the following. 1. I am you FZ, my BS, your younger brother. Reciprocal term = fv:na-beyngu. 2. You are my brother-in-law, my fv:makkah \'91FMB\'92, your younger brother  or fv:mawah. Reciprocal term = fv:mawah. 3. You are my child (I am a woman), my son, your younger brother. Reciprocal term = fv:na-yawngu. 4. You are my fv:mamamh \'91MF(Z)\'92, my fv:mamamh, your younger brother. Reciprocal term = fv:na-beyngu. 5. You are my fv:mawah \'91SC\'92, my fv:mawah \'91SC\'92, your younger brother. Reciprocal term = fv:djakerr. 6. You are my fv:na-kurrng \'91FZDC\'92, my fv:na-kurrng \'91MMBS\'92, your younger brother. Reciprocal term = fv:na-djakerr. 7. You are my son, referent is also my son, your younger brother. Reciprocal term = na-beyngu\
\\dt 15/May/2006\
\
\\lx djakerr\
\\pr na-\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my fv:mamamh your younger brother, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn na-beyngu\
\\de 2.My nephew, your younger brother you are my nephew.\
\\cn djakerr.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djahkorl\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de firesticks, made from the wood of Premna acuminata\
\\pdn kk= kun-bembem\
\
\\lx djahkorl\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de fire stick tree\
\\sc Premna acuminata\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djakku (kun-djakku)\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de left hand side\
\\xv kudjakku\
\\xe on the left hand side\
\\xv djakku\
\\xe 'leftie', a nick name.\
\
\\lx djakorlk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mudskipper\
\\re small mudskippers\
\\de kind of small prawn-like crustacean\
\\xv Kabarri-raworren dirddid, wakih, djakorlk, ngalng. Kukak kabarri-bebme. Kabarri-rawon wakihngong.\
\\xe All these small animals are in one group, isopods, prawns, little mudskippers and yabbies. They come out at night. These are all kinds of prawn-like animals.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 04/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx djakudjkudj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Facial hair, whiskers.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-djawurrk, djawurrkno\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djakurrkkurrk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wild.grape\
\\re fi:Ampelocissus_acetosa\
\\de a low growing and scrambling climber with edible black currant-like fruit\
\\xv An-djakurrkkurrk ngurrurdu ka-ngun, kudjewk.\
\\xe Emus eat the wild grape, in the wet season (when it fruits).\
\\sc Ampelocissus acetosa\
\\sy an-djalke, an-wak\
\\ee fv:an-wak is a name for a number of plants with similar clustered fruits- fi:Leea_rubra,_Melostoma_sp. and fi:Ampelocissus_acetosa\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-nunjek, I= man-djalke\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djal-\
\\ps v. pref.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge just\
\\re just\
\\ng Prefix on Verbs, noun-adjective compounds, adjectives, numerals and locations. When it restricts nouns, it is a separate word rather than a prefix.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Up to a point (scope over the verb).\
\\xv Maminga ngun-mang, yi-djalyo yi-rrowen.\
\\xe If a giant clam grabs you, you just lie there until you die.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Durative (scope over the verb). \
\\xv Yi-djalbun\
\\xe Keep hitting it.\
\\xv Bih-djalnanganang na-ngamenani nuye, warlang, warlang nuye, na-bininjkobeng.\
\\xe He kept on watching her, whatshisname, ghost bat, ghost bat's wife, ghost bat was the husband.\
\\xv Ka-djalyawwake.\
\\xe The child is still crawling, only crawling (it can't walk yet).\
\\sn 3\
\\de For no specific purpose or intent\
\\xv Ngam-djalwam.\
\\xe I've just come for no reason.\
\\xv Ngam-djalbom\
\\xe I've just rung you on the phone for no reason (just to say hello).\
\\sn 4\
\\de 'only do x and no more'\
\\xv Madjinbarli ngarri-djalngun.\
\\xe We simply eat the white apple (without needing to prepare it in any way); we just eat the white apple as it is.\
\\xv Minj yidduyi, dja djalbawong.\
\\xe He didn't get angry, but just left it.\
\\sn 4\
\\de Ambiguous restrictive scope over grammatical arguments or some other adjuncts.\
\\xv A-djalwokdi Kundjeyhmi.\
\\xe I keep speaking Kundjeyhmi. OR: I speak only Kundjeyhmi.\
\\sn 5\
\\de Restrictive scope over grammatical object.\
\\xv Wanjh karri-djalburrnbun kun-kudji Balanda bu karri-wokdi, dja karri-bimbun yarrka, dja minj bu ngadman kadberre kun-wok karri-bihbimbun, kunu karri-wakwan.\
\\xe We only know how to write anything in English, which we can speak, but we don't know how to write our own language.\
\\sn 6\
\\de Restrictive scope over grammatical subject.\
\\xv Ngaye nga-djalkudji nga-marnedjaldjare.\
\\xe Only I love her/him.\
\
\\lx Djalaban\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mythological ancestor, his figure stands in rock near Yikarrakkal.\
\
\\lx djalaban\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de multi-pronged spear, similar to 'fish wire' spear except the points are made from hardwood.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djalabarn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place name for the home of fv:Dad-dubbe the one-legged fv:mimih spirit.\
\\xv Djalabarn kun-red Dad-dubbe nuye.\
\\xe fv:Djalabarn is the home of fv:Dad-dubbe the fv:mimih spirit.\
\
\\lx djalabarn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de small toy spear with a sharpened wooden point.\
\
\\lx djalak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de phlegm, dark mucous associated with head cold, flu or respiratory illness\
\\xv Djalak na-Burnungku djang.\
\\xe Throat phlegm is a Burnungku patriclan dreaming totem.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv E, I= komnud\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djalakiradj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de 'fish wire' spear, wire\
\\uv W= wirlmurr\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Djalama\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a number of patriclans in the upper Kumadderr (Goomadeer) River district\
\\xv Ngad ngarri-djalama, Kundjalama ngarri-wokdi.\
\\xe We people of Djalama clan speak our own clan dialect called Kundjalama.\
\\ee The Iwaidja and Mawng analogue of this clan name (different locations and lineages) is fv:Yalama \
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djalamarddawk\
\\va djalamardawk\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Passiflora_foetida\
\\re passionfruit\
\\re bush passionfruit\
\\de bush passionfruit\
\\sc Passiflora foetida\
\\sd plant\
\
\\lx djalamardi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de 1.tree orchid 2.a plant with edible tuber but leaves similar to the orchid (JD-D).\
\\sc 1. Dendrobium dicuphum 2. ?\
\\ee The juice from the base of the plant was used as a fixative for ochre pigments on bark, stone or body\
decoration.\
\\pdn kk= none (MK)\
\\uv Kune yarlkkan, Kundjeyhmi njarlkkan, Jawony nyarlkan (ground orchid)\
\\ee REM =yarlkkan\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djalamardi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de tree orchid\
\\sc Dendrobium affine\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx djalangkarridj-djalangkarridj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dragonfly\
\\re dragonfly\
\\de dragonfly\
\\xv Djalangkarridj-djalangkarridj ka-mulewan djenj. Bu karri-nan wanjh arri-mang djenj wanjh.\
\\xe Dragonflies tell us that fish are numerous now. When we see them, we go fishing.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx djalarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge centipede\
\\re centipede\
\\de centipede\
\\xv Djalarr djang bedberre birri-Madjba.\
\\xe The fv:djalarr centipede is a dreaming for Madjba (Jawoyn) clan people.\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\ur I= djodj\
\\sd insects\
\
\\lx Djalarr\
\\va Djalarr Kayuwa\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area of springs, jungle and creeks in the Djurlka estate. This is north of the waterfall at Djurlka below the plateau, around 9km east-northeast of Mamardawerre outstation. It is Djang for centipede (Djalarr means \'91centipede\'92). Considered a dangerous place which should not be interfered with in any way whatsoever, including the breaking of sticks and plants. The site consists of a series of pools and jungle thicket associated with centipede spirit beings that arrived at this site from Djurlka.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djalawarra\
\\ps n.\
\\re trousers\
\\de trousers\
\\xv Yo burlnjinh man-budbud, nungka-ke ngarri-marnbuyi ya ngarri-nameninj ya kunj\
mudno. Namekke, naneh nawu djalawarra bolkkime balanda.\
\\xe Yes, pubic covering belts were made from Kurrajong fibre and we used to put them on with kangaroo fur. The trousers of today are things belonging to Balanda (Europeans).\
\\bw from Makassarese fi:saluwara 'trousers\'92\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djalay\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de keep doing action\
\\xv Yi-djalay\
\\xe Keep going further.\
\
\\lx Djalbangurrk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re estate name\
\\de regional place name for the region on the upper reaches and headwaters of the Kumadderr (Goomadeer) River\
\\xv Bolkkime konda nga-wokdi nga-yolyolme bu nadjinem nga-yolyolme bu korroko mak konda kunred ka-bolkngeyyo\
Djalbangurrk kubolkbadjan bad Makkalarl kubolkyaw. \
\\xe I'll tell you today about the black wallaroo here in this country called Djalbangurrk which is the big place name but the small locality is\
known as Makkalarl. \
\\sd estate\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx djalbbirdo\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\va djalbbirdo\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Syzygium.sp.\
\\re |fi\{Syzygium eucalyptoides ssp. bleeseri, Syzygium fibrosum\}\
\\de Kind of small tree (5-10m) with edible white fruit in late dry to early wet season. The ripe fruits are considered a seasonal indicator for fv:kunumeleng time.\
\\xv Djalbbirdo ka-worrbalabala.\
\\xe The white apple tree has broad flat leaves.\
\\sc Syzygium eucalyptoides ssp. bleeseri, Syzygium fibrosum\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djalbelmi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Stand.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Be.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde di\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djaled\
\\ps n.\
\\ge centipede\
\\re centipede\
\\de Centipede.\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= djodj, Kdj= marla, W= djalarr\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 26/Feb/2014\
\
\\lx djalen\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de darwin woollybutt tree\
\\sc Eucalyptus miniata |fs\{(long-barked variety).\}\
\\ee Short-barked variety is fv:an-nerrekmi. fv:Man-djalen has long fibrous bark strips good for lighting fires. The bark of\
fv:(m)an-nerrekmi however is not so useful. The onset of flowering is taken as a sign for the start of fv:wurrkeng, and as well, that the\
dry time has properly arrived. The seeds may be eaten raw.\
\\pdn kk= djerrnggolh\
\\sy an-balanjdjarr\
\\uv Kdj, Djnj (= an-djalen), W (= man-djalen)\
\\ur I, E= man-balanjdjarr\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djalh\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de dry plant matter, dead leaves, dry grass\
\
\\lx djalke\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wild.grape\
\\re fi:Ampelocissus_acetosa\
\\de Wild grape. A low growing and scrambling climber with edible black currant-like fruit but has a burning after-taste.\
\\sc Ampelocissus acetosa\
\\ee In Kundedjnjenghmi an-wak is a synonym for this plant although this is also a name for a number of plants with similar clustered fruits such as |fi\{Leea rubra, Melostoma sp.\} and fi:Ampelocissus_acetosa.\
\\uv I, W, Djnj\
\\ur Kdj = an-nunjek, an-kurrad, balawak; Djnj (syn.)= an-djakurrkkurrk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djalkih\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Wild Grape\
\\sc Ampelocissus acetosa\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =man-djalke.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Djalkkakeyo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place name on Kumarrirnbang creek near Makkalarl in the Yurlhmanj clan estate.\
\
\\lx djalkkardbam\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Platysace.arnhemica\
\\re fi:Platysace_arnhemica\
\\de kind of plant\
\\xv An-djalkkardbam namarnde nuye an-karnbubumi ka-rohrok, bad nuye namarnde. Ku-kodj ka-kurrme namarnde. Minj\
karri-ngeybun nuye ngeyno wardi kan-bengbadjdje.\
\\xe The fi:Platysace_arnhemica plant is also called fv:an-karnbubumi, the same plant, but it belongs to the spirit being. It holds the plant in\
front of his head. We do not call the name of this plant by the spirit name otherwise it would attack our minds.\
\\xv Barrk ka-ngerrburren kure an-djalkardbam.\
\\xe The black wallaroo rubs itself against the fi:Platysace_arnhemica tree.\
\\sc Platysace arnhemica\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\p George Chaloupka has a photo of Nipper with a frond in his hair.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djalkken-\
\\ps adv.\
\\ng verbal prefix\
\\de pertaining to connection or the bringing of objects or entities together\
\\cf djalkkenname, djalkken-kurrme, djalkkennamerren, djalkken\
\
\\lx djalkkename\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de connect two parts together\
\\xv Man-kole nawu mirrhmamirrhmak yi-nayi birri-mirrhbuyi, birri-djalkkennameninj,\
birri-danjbuyi, djenj.\
\\xe They used to make really sharp spears and put the sharp point into the shaft and they'd spear fish.\
\\xv Key yi-djalkkennamen kure murrika.\
\\xe Put the key in the car [in the ignition].\
\\xv Cassette yi-djalkkennamen kure tape nga-bekkan.\
\\xe Put the cassette inside the cassette player and I'll listen to it.\
\\xv Kan-djalkkenname ku-burldjarn.\
\\xe Put me in the middle [of a queue, or a line of dancers].\
\\xv Konda nga-djalkken namerren.\
\\xe I'll put myself in the middle [of the queue].\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djalkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cut into pieces, slice in half\
\\xv Birri-djalkdjalkmey kun-dad, kun-berl, kunberl, kun-kodj, kun-dume birri-dadjkeng.\
\\xe They cut up the legs, arms, head, and lower back.\
\
\\lx djalkoybun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de urinate\
\\uv Kune Na-rayek.\
\\uv Kune Na-kerlk =djorrkoybun, I =lebun, dilebun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djaloh\
\\ps v. pref.\
\\ng djal+woh\
\\sn 1\
\\de 'Just doing this little action', only, nothing more.\
\\xv Dja djurra kumek\'92 nga-yawkakani kodjkurlumak, ku-yirrk ngarduk. Nga-djalohdanginj.\
\\xe I was carrying a little bible, in my string bag. I just stood there for a while (with fire burning all around).\
\\xv Kayakki, djalohkoweng.\
\\xe It's nothing, I was only having you on.\
\\sn 2\
\\de For no purpose, to no result.\
\\xv Karri-djalohwamwi karri-kowerrinj.\
\\xe We just went there for nothing (didn't get what we wanted), we were under the incorrect belief (that something could be obtained there).\
\\dt 20/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djaloy\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Desire, want.\
\\xv Bu kandi-weybuyi ngarri-djaloyi.\
\\xn Bu kandi-woyi ngarri-djaremeninj.\
\\xe If you could possibly give it to us we would like that.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djare\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djalubu\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de didjeridu\
\\pde mako\
\\sy morle.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx Djalumbu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate next to fv:Djorrkkunnguknolorrhmeng but further 'down'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djamadobdob\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de edible seeds of the woolybutt tree, fv:Eucalyptus miniata\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx Djamamburru\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Bolkngok estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx djamandarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of taro, roasted overnight to remove toxins\
\\sc Colocasia esculenta\
\\uv Djnj, E\
\
\\lx djamard\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Sevenspot Archerfish and Primitive Archerfish\
\\sc Toxotes chatereus and Toxotes lorentzi\
\\uv M, also Rembarrnga.\
\\uv I= djoloborn, W, Kdj= njarlkan, E (Na-kerlk)= djedberdeh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djamarlak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de 1. ceremony of diplomacy of Yolngu groups. 2. women in kakkali relationship to dancers in fv:walk,\
fv:mamurrng and other exchange ceremonies. These women are required to taunt, hit, tease and\
generally distract dancers as they perform. Later they may award their classificatory partners with\
payment of gifts.\
\\xv Bu yi-borrke djamarlak ngun-bun.\
\\xe If you dance the fv:djamarlak will hit you.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djamarlingki\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de the place where the fv:Na-korrkko father and son set out on their ancestral travels.\
\\xv Djamarlingki Na-korrkko bene-dolkkang wanjh Mindjilang bene-bebmeng.\
\\xe The fv:Na-korrkko creation ancestors set out from Djamarlingki and arrived at Midjilang (Croker\
Island).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djamarndarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de taro\
\\sc Colocasia esculenta\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx Djamarr\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\de place name in Mok clan estate, Havelock Falls\
\
\\lx djambarldjambarl\
\\ps n.\
\\de Steam punishment for teenagers as part of the Mardayin ceremony or some circumcision ceremonies. This involved holding the youths over coals onto which water is poured or sitting them on platforms also called fv:djambarldjambarl with rising steam below.\
\\xv Djambarldjambarl nawu kun-rak kabirri-werrhme njirrkeno kabirri-barrhbun kun-djalh wanjh kabirri-djuhke wurdurd kaddum djawoyno kaben-kinje.\
\\xe Djambarldjambarl is when they rake a fire and cover over the ashes with leaves and throw water onto it.\
The young person above gets burnt by the steam.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djamban\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tamarind\
\\re tamarind\
\\de Tamarind tree and fruit. \
\\bw From Makassarese fi:camba.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx djambarrhmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lift and throw OBJ down with force\
\\xv Ngan-djambarrhdjambarrhmang muddikang.\
\\xe The truck is throwing me around.\
\
\\lx an-djambendord\
\\va djambendord\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re fi:Drosera_petiolaris\
\\de sundew plant\
\\xv Djambendord yiman didjkala, me-yak marrek ka-karrme an-me.\
\\xe The sundew is similar to fi:Cartonema_spicatum but it has no edible part.\
\\sc Drosera petiolaris\
\\sn 2\
\\de synonym sometimes used for the prostrate form of fv:(an)didjkala, fi:'Cartonema_spicatum' which has an edible tuber. This can cause some confusion as both varieties of fi:Cartonema_spicatum (the larger erect form and the prostrate form) have an edible tuber but the sundew does not.\
\\xv An-djambendord arri-ngun kaddum arri-djalngun marrek arri-ngolung. Arri-we mimno arri-djaldarrkidngun.\
\\xe We eat the top part of the fi:Cartonema_spicatum, we just eat it without cooking it. We throw away the seeds and eat it as it is.\
\\sc Cartonema spicatum\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djambudda\
\\pr ku-\
\\va djambuddano\
\\ps n.\
\\ge flat.rock\
\\re flat rock expanse\
\\de Expanse of open flat rock such as the wide margins of water courses, characteristically uncluttered by rocky debris \
\\xv Kilkken kukabo, karrkad kudjambudda. \
\\xe The creek is down below, the rocky platform up on top.\
\\xv Ka-boyarlarrme kudjambudda.\
\\xe The water is spreading out (flowing) across the wide expanse of rock.\
\\xv Ka-djalbokolung kudjambudda.\
\\xe The water is cascading down over a series of flat rock platforms.\
\\cf kudjambudjambudda\
\\ce larger expanse of open flat rock\
\\cf kudjambudjambudda rorrbono\
\\ce an extensive area of flat rock, open with few or no trees\
\
\\lx djamdemed\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mythical creature said to resemble a dinasaur or giant crocodile. Sacred site is situated on Croker\
Island.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djamdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be located up high on a ledge in a rock shelter or in the fork of a tree\
\\xv Ngurri-ka kuni ngurri-djamdi ku-wardde.\
\\xe CHECK\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx djamko\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Grevillea.spp.\
\\re Grevillea spp. (|fi\{Grevillea angulata, Grevillea dryandri, Grevillea formosa\})\
\\sd plant\
\\de Generic name for a group of sandstone country grevilleas. fi:Grevillea_formosa is however also more specifically referred to as fv:an-bamedjak.\
\\sc Grevillea angulata, Grevillea dryandri, Grevillea formosa\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ee fi:Grevillea_dryandri is also known as fv:an-winjhwinjh in Kundedjnjenghmi.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Grevillea.goodii\
\\re fi:Grevillea_goodii\
\\de kind of prostrate red-flowering grevillea\
\\sc Grevillea goodii\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur Djnj= an-djamko ku-kurlkwaken\
\\ee Note that to disambiguate fi:Grevillea_goodii from the other grevilleas on the Arnhem Land plateau, Kundedjnjenghmi calls fi:Grevillea_goodii 'the grevillea that grows low on the ground'. Some of the grevilleas found in Kundedjnjenghmi territory are not found or are rare in the areas where the other Bininj Kunwok dialects are spoken and so fv:man-djamko usually refers primarily to fi:Grevillea_goodii in Kuninjku and Kune.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djamko kukurlkwaken\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grevillea.goodii\
\\re fi:Grevillea_goodii\
\\de kind of red-flowering prostrate grevillea\
\\sc Grevillea goodii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur E, I= man-djamko\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djamun\
\\ps n.\
\\ge police\
\\re police\
\\de police\
\\dt 20/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djamun\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge discipline\
\\re ceremonial discipline\
\\de Ceremonial discipline.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge holiness\
\\re holiness\
\\re sacredness\
\\de Holiness, sacredness.\
\\dt 20/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djamun\
\\pr man-\
\\sn 1\
\\ps n.\
\\ge genitals\
\\re genitals\
\\de Genitals of man or woman.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge sacred.food\
\\re sacred.food\
\\de Restricted food, such as that given as payment in ceremony and can only be eaten by certain individuals.\
\\dt 20/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djamun\
\\pr na-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de sacred, restricted, secret, set apart.\
\\xv Na-djamun minj karri-yolyolme.\
\\xe That's secret/sacred, we don't talk about that.\
\\xv Nawu warehware birri-djamun ngarrbenkan, la birri-yarlang bonj rerre kabirrim-re.\
\\xe The sacred participants in the ceremony, we'll take them and the 'outside' participants can come later.\
\\pdn kk= njeknjek\
\\cf bolk-djamun\
\\ce restricted area, sacred place\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djamunbuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge juvenile.antilopine\
\\re antilopine male kangaroo (juvenile)\
\\de Juvenile male antilopine wallaroo. Adult make is called fv:karndakidj.\
\\sc Macropus antilopinus\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djamunhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make sacred\
\\xv Wanjkawurrno kabirri-kurrme\
\\nt check.\
\
\\lx djanadjanak\
\\pref\
\\va djanadjanek\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de song genre from Amurdak language group (and in Amurdak and Iwaidja is spelt/pronounced fv:Yanajanak), used in public ceremonies\
such as circumcision.\
\\ee In 2006 the key songman for this genre is Charlie Mangulda\
\\xv Djanadjanak man-dule maneke wayini Bangardi wanjh yerrkmeng.\
\\xe Bangardi sang that fv:djanadjanak song and then he (the initiate) was circumcised.\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx djanarra\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd bird\
\\de Jabiru Stork, black-necked stork\
\\sc Ephippiorhyncus australis\
\\pde kandji\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djanay\
\\ps n.\
\\ge goanna\
\\re kind of goanna\
\\re yellow-spotted monitor\
\\de Yellow spotted monitor which is a goanna similar in size (up to 1 metre) to fv:kalawan fi:Varanus_gouldii but with different colour and skin patterning\
\\ee fv:Djanay is called fv:djarnahdjarna in a children's fv:morrdjdjanjno song which explains how fv:djanay announces the clearing of the clouds at the end of the wet season.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\sc Varanus panoptes\
\\bb Cogger 2000:372\
\\dt 02/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx djanbarl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sleepy.cod\
\\re sleepy cod\
\\re mud cod\
\\de Sleepy cod (also known as mud cod); and also the very similar black-banded gudgeon\
\\sc Oxyeleotris lineolata and Oxyeleotris herwerdeni\
\\en duwa\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= makali\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djanbe\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de shelter type, a house built high off the ground to avoid mosquitoes. Also that used in the Mamurrng\
ceremony.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx man-djandadj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sand.palm\
\\re sand palm\
\\de sand palm tree\
\\sc Livistonia humilis\
\\se man-djandahdjandadj\
\\de Sand palm grove.\
\\sy djendek, marrabbi, (m)an-marrabbi, man-kurlurrudj\
\\uv Some Kuninjku speakers say fv:man-djandadj is a fv:yirridjdja clan \
\\ur Djnj= an-marrabbi\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Djandadjkal\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx man-djandahdjandadj\
\\ps n.\
\\re sand palm grove\
\\de Sand Palm grove.\
\\cf see man-djandadj\
\\sd geographic\
\
\\lx djandi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hang around waiting for offers of food\
\
\\lx djandul\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de morning fog\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= djurlurl\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djanek\
\\pr an-\
\\va man-danek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Typhonium_spp.\
\\re Arum plant\
\\de Kind of herbaceous plant of the Arum family (as are fi:Amorphophallus_spp.) with a subterranean corm which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is rendered edible. The leaves and stem are removed and the corm roasted in hot coals. It is then pounded with a stone for a long time to get the juice out, washed with water and pounded again. The corm pulp must turn from white to a black colour before it is edible. Arum plants belong to the fv:yarriburrik matry which has fire as its totemic emblem, most likely because fire is involved in the preparation of the tubers.\
\\xv Kuwardde kaddum minj bu wernhdjarre darnki, ngarri-bidbom kumekke ngarri-yoy man-danek ngarri-doy.\
\\xe Up in the rocks not up high but close [to the ground], we climbed up and there we camped and pounded fi:Typhonium_sp.\
\\so Thomson Yuludjiri talking about Dilkbany at Lanka in Alarrdju country. Djnj name from LBN.\
\\ee There is considerable variation in shape and size of Arum plants and as a result, different sizes of the same species may have different\
names in Bininj Kunwok.\
\\sc Typhonium cochlear, Typhonium flagelliforme, Typhonium russell-smithii\
\\sy kubulurr\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur W= man-danek\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx djankarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of shrub\
\\xv Kun-kare barri-wungmi djankarr dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe A long time ago, the old people used to smoke (leaves of) fv:Striga curviflora.\
\\sc Striga curviflora\
\
\\lx djankarr\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fern,sp\
\\re fi:Schizacea_dichotoma\
\\re fern species\
\\de branched comb fern- a kind of delicate terrestrial fern (20-45cm high)\
\\xv An-djankarr ka-kobun ka-mankan ka-yawoyhdangen ka-kolhdebebme.\
\\xe The branched comb fern flowers and then falls down and sprouts new shoots and grows up again.\
\\sc Schizacea dichotoma\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djankele\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sand.palm\
\\re sand palm\
\\re fi:Livistonia_humilis\
\\sd plant\
\\de livistonia palm. Some dialects have separate names for small and large specimens e.g. in Kundjeyhmi large trees are called fv:marrabbi and smaller ones fv:an-kurlurrudj.\
\\xv An-berrk ka-re o yika mak ka-re kure aa yiman man-me bu ka-mirnderri kumekke kunu ka-re yiman an-burrurnburrurn ka-yikan ka-ngun o yika mak ka-djale an-berrk nawu yiman ka-yime an-bedde ka-ngun ngalngale bu an-buyika... aa nga-yime an-kulurrudj mane ka-yime ka-ngun yi-burrbun an-kurlurrudj, djankele nawu?\
\\xe She goes through open woodland or sometimes anywhere where she can find her food, especially dodder laurel fruit fi:(Cassytha_filiformis), she goes looking for that or open woodland where there is quinine bush fi:(Petalostigma_pubescens) and also Livistonia palm seeds/fruit, she eats that also. Do you know that Livistonia palm, [which we call] fv:an-kulurrudj or fv:djankele?\
\\sc Livistonia humilis\
\\sy (m)an-kurlurrudj\
\\uv E, Djnj\
\\uv I= djendek, marrabbi\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djankele\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of fan palm which grows in sandstone country\
\\sc Livistona inermis\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx djankerle\
\\va djankele\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sd mythology\
\\de palm species Livistonia humilis. This is a special name for the palms inhabited by a spirit called\
fv:marawarr in the area around Kumadderr. In Kune dialect this is the ordinary name for <Livistonia\
humilis>. Kune speakers pronounce this word as fv:djankele.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djanmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de extract a spear after penetration\
\\xv ...bonj la birri-djandjan-mey birri-djandjan-mey birri-djalkdjalk-mey wanjh birri-kinjeng\
nunganwali. Bonj.\
\\xe ....at last they pulled out the spears, and burnt him in the fire, finished.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djanobme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de loaf food, money or other goods off someone.\
\\nt check part of speech.\
\
\\lx djanorro\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Corymbia_polysciada\
\\de Kind of paper-fruited bloodwood Eucalyptus tree species with scaly grey tessalated lower bark which gives way to smooth white or pale grey bark on upper trunk and branches.\
\\en yirridjdja moiety\
\\sy an-komborloh\
\\sc Corymbia polysciada (formerly Eucalyptus clavigera).\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djanre\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de walk around with a view to asking somebody for food or money.\
\
\\lx djanud\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de grass\
\\pde kun-dalk\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djanudken\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd mammal\
\\de dingo\
\\lit (kun-) djanud-ken, 'from the grass'.\
\\sc Canis familiaris\
\\ee kk.(E) djungdjungh, kk.(W) njunjung\
\\pde dalkken\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dreaming\
\\re totemic site, dreaming\
\\re dreaming, totemic emblem\
\\re sacred site\
\\sn 1\
\\de Place of religious significance where the spiritual essence of a totemic being, plant, animal or other emblem resides in a particular location.\
\\xv Nga-bukkang mani djang narlangak name nga-baruhburrinj delek karlba. Barlemno narlangak. Nga-bukkang nga-barurrinj oh ba-yimeng ka-djalwarre Djobborndirdidj kunu. Narlangak djang.\
\\xe I showed people this frilled-neck lizard dreaming and I\'92ve painted my body with the white and yellow clay there. It represents the fat of the frilled-neck lizard. I showed the place to others and covered myself with the clay. They were really impressed. The site is called Djobborndirdidj. It\'92s a frilled-neck lizard sacred site.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Totemic emblem, 'dreaming'.\
\\xv Kun-red nga-bolknahnan djang ngarduk nawu kurrmerrinj ba-kurrmerrinj nayuhyungki dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe I am looking after this place, my dreaming which was placed here by the first [creator] ancestors.\
\\xv Nanin djang anwu nga-kurrmi nga-kurrmeng bu namekke an-kung djang. \
\\xe This dreaming I've put here [in the painting] is that honey dreaming totem.\
\\uv W, I, Kdj\
\\ur E= djarng\
\
\\lx djangakme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de ceremonial call or yell for yirridjdja only.\
\\xv Kakkawarr kam-re wanjh ka-djangakme.\
\\xe The ceremonial messenger will come and yell out the yirridjdja ceremonial call.\
\
\\lx djangara\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1.mouth\
\\de 2. door\
\\xv Yi-djangarabalhbonghmen.\
\\pde Yi-rrangbalhmen.\
\\pde kun-dang\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djangarak\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djangarakno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de jaw\
\
\\lx djangarakurdadj\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de Red Bush Apple\
\\lit 'mouth blood'\
\\sc Syzygium suborbiculare\
\\pde djarduk\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djangarrakornam\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de River Shark\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde nakkorro\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djangberhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de put body smell on something\
\\xv Ngarri-djang-berhme kun-kurra, kun-kurra 'and' djang wurrkadji mak Lorlo, kumekke\
ka-djang-di.\
\\xe check (from Kalarriya story)\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djangdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.dreaming\
\\re dreaming place (be)\
\\de Have a sacred site or totemic emblem.\
\\xv Durlmangkarr konda ka-djangdi Kudjaborrng. Barrk kumekke djang ka-yo. O njamed nawaran.\
\\xe The Durlmangkarr clan have a dreaming place here at Kudjaborrng. There is a black wallaroo dreaming or whatsit, an Oenpelli python dreaming there.\
\\dt 24/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djangkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go hunting\
\\uv W= warlbun\
\\pdn kk= djahdjangmodme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djangwe\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de perform increase ritual\
\\xv Birri-mayi kun-malawo birri-djangwemeninj 'djenj' birri-yimeng, 'Ngarri-djare djenj\
ka-wernmen ngarri-ngun'.\
\\xe When they would perform the increase ritual they would go and get branches and say 'fish', 'we want\
fish to increase so we can eat'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djanj\
\\pr man-, \'f8\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge bland\
\\re bland, weak, diluted\
\\de Bland, weak taste, diluted, no sugar in tea, not sweet (sometimes the prefix is left off or reduplication for emphasis; fv:djah-djanj.)\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djandjan\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.gonocarpa\
\\re fi:Acacia_gonocarpa\
\\de small acacia shrub with cream flowers\
\\xv Kore midjandjan ngani; kun-ngurlubburr kani.\
\\xe [Text of a fv:bongolinj-bongolinj song by Djorli Laiwonga] I sit in the fi:Acacia_gonocarpa grove; it [the black wallaroo] sits in a\
rocky crevice.\
\\sc Acacia gonocarpa\
\\sy an-bulngbulng, an-djendjen\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djanjdjanjbak\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de small amount of food or other fv:man- class thing.\
\\xv man-djanjdjanjbak kano.\
\\xe Give me a little bit of food.\
\\pde Kardbam fv:kun-dangwok 'clan lect'.\
\
\\lx djanjdjanjbak\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de na-Kardbam fv:kun-dangwok 'clan lect' name.\
\\cf man-djanjdjanjbak\
\\ce small amount of food\
\
\\lx djanjwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de wet with rain\
\\xv Man-djewk ka-djakdung kan-djanjwon.\
\\xe The rain falls and we get wet.\
\
\\lx djardahke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de force an object so as to make it stuck in a position\
\\xv Nimbuwa ben-wayhkeng ben-djardahkeng kure kuwardde.\
\\xe Nimbuwa lifted them and stuck them in the rock.\
\
\\lx djardahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be stuck, locked in a position\
\
\\va djardakorddokkord\
\\va djaddokorddokord\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rosella.sp.\
\\re northern rosella\
\\de Northern rosella.\
\\sc Platycercus venustus\
\
\\lx djardawok\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp\
\\re fi:Diospyros_calycantha\
\\de Kind of tree; wood used for fv:borndok 'spearthrowers'.\
\\sc Diospyros calycantha\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djarduk\
\\pr \'f8\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge apple.tree\
\\re fi:Syzygium_suborbiculare\
\\re red apple tree\
\\re bush apple tree\
\\de Red bush apple tree.\
\\ee Red fruit eaten late fv:kunumeleng to mid wet season fv:kudjewk\
\\xv Djarduk nawu yi-burrbun nawu djarduk dangbele nakka djal kunumeleng.\
\\xe You know the red bush apple tree with the white flesh inside, well it fruits in the early wet season.\
\\xv Nawern djarduk nguneng kure kaddum barndi.\
\\xe He ate lots of red apples while he was up in the tree.\
\\sc Syzygium suborbiculare\
\\pdn kk = djangarakurdadj\
\\uv I, E, Djnj, Kdj, W\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djarladdjarla\
\\ps n.\
\\de Roots of purple water lily, eaten.\
\\xv Ku-labbarl ka-rri nawern wayuk. Karri-ngun kanjwerr, djarladdjarla djal burdbarrk.\
\\xe There are lots of water lily plants in the billabongs. We eat the lily seed heads, the water lily roots and the water lily corms.\
\\sc Nymphaea gigantea, var. violacea\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 06/May/2015\
\
\\lx djarlan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de ladder for climbing up to get eg. honey, or to cut bark or paint on rock etc.\
\
\\lx djarlanno\
\\va kun-djarlan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de bladder\
\\xv Yi-djarlan-dubbe!\
\\xe You blocked bladder (an insult).\
\\xv Bonj, nga-djarlan-lurlmeng.\
\\xe No, (I don't want anymore to drink) my bladder is full.\
\
\\lx djarlarrk\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de salt water cockle shells\
\
\\lx djarlk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Flower cones of fv:Baksia dentata. The cones are used for\
\\cf djarlkbun\
\\ce break off Banksia cones\
\\xv Karri-djarlkbun karri-birli-kan.\
\\xe We break off Banksia cones and take fire with them.\
\\sy midju\
\
\\lx djarlkerr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge turtle.sp.\
\\re northern yellow-faced turtle\
\\de Northern yellow-faced turtle. Restricted to the South Alligator River region of Kakadu National Park (but also recorded in the Daly and Mitchell Rivers. May also be in Reynolds, Adelaide, McKinley, Mary, Howard and East\
Alligator Rivers of the Northern Territory).\
\\sc Emydura tanybaraga\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\
\\lx Djarlum\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name \
\\de special fi:yikurrumu ritualistic name for the Kulmarru clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djarlung\
\\ps n.\
\\ge brown.snake\
\\re king brown snake\
\\de King brown snake.\
\\sc Pseudechis australis\
\\uv Kdj, also Jawoyn.\
\\ur W, I, E, Djnj= dadbe\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djarnbimbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de paint a body decoration\
\\cf djarnbim\
\\ce body painting\
\
\\lx djarnbinj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge body.painting\
\\re body painting\
\\de Designs painted on the bodies of initiates after completing participation in the Kunabibi. The designs are painted in red ochre on the chest and back, can be displayed in public and consist of four different designs, with a different one painted on each of the four days. The first three consist of variations of snake designs and the fourth one is a series of parallel lines caled fv:linbilinbi.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\
\\lx Djarnbokkorn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de name of mythical character in the fv:Maladj story from fv:Kabbari. Djarnbokkorn was the big brother\
of the crying orphan fv:Maladj.\
\\xv Djarnbokkorn na-wernwarre la Maladj wurdyaw.\
\\xe fv:Djarnbokkorn was the older brother and fv:Maladj the young child.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djarnhba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de cocky apple\
\\sc Planchonia careya\
\\sy man-wodberr\
\\uv E =man-korlh\
\\ee Rembarrnga fv:djarnhba =Ficus virens\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djarniman\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de small tick\
\\cf see fv:middurru\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djarnkerrk\
\\va djankerrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de 1. name of a mythical Antilopine Kangaroo, offspring of fv:Yingarna the Rainbow Serpent.\
\\xv Karndakidj, ngaleng Yingarna ngal-badjan kabi-munkewe ka-re ka-ngun kun-dalk wanjh nga-re, ngan-nan, ngan-burddjinome wanjh ka-djuhme ka-wurlebme kure ngal-badjan. Namekke ka-ngey-yo 'Djarnkerrk', karndakidj.\
\\xe That Antilopine Kangaroo, the mother is fv:Yingarna and she sends it out to eat grass. Then I come along and it sees me, smells my scent and jumps into the water where its mother is. It's name is\
fv:Djarnkerrk, an Antilopine Kangaroo.\
\\uv I\
\\de Name applied to rock art depictions of the thylacine, a pet of mimih spirits.\
\\sc Thylacinus cynocephalus\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djarnkil\
\\ps n.\
\\re northern snapping turtle\
\\re fi:Elseya_dentata\
\\de Very large specimen of northern snapping turtle, the smaller specimens are called fv:ngardderrhwo and very small specimens (along with the saw-shelled turtle) are called fv:bamrdek.\
\\xv Djarnkil na-kimuk duninj dja bamrdek yahwurd bodmedulmeng.\
\\xe The big snapping turtle is called fv:djarnkil and the little one with a ridge along its back is called fv:bamrdek.\
\\xv Warradjan yiman kalabikka karohrok. Djarnkil ngarderrhwo nomo warradjan didjan. Djarnkil ngalkimuk yiman ka-yime Kamarrkawarn ka-rri Kunkanindjuhmeng. Bolk yirridjdja komdukkurr.\
\\xe The pig-nosed turtle is big like a sea turtle. But this turtle is called Djarnkil, a kind of short-necked turtle. It is not a pig-nosed turtle. The Djarnkil turtle is large also and is found at Kamarrkawarn at a site called Kunkanindjuhmeng [literally: \'91digging stick fell in the water\'92]. That place is associated with the yirridjdja moiety. The turtle has a short neck. \
\\sc Elseya dentata\
\\uv W, Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= yumun\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 25/Aug/2014\
\
\\lx djarnngal\
\\ps n.\
\\re forked branch\
\\de Fork in branch. Larger Y-shaped forked branches are used as a ladder to climb trees. The fork is laid against the tree and you climb up.\
\\ng Often the locative prefix ku- is attached fv:kudjarnngal \'91in the fork of the branch\'92.\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 23/Nov/2014\
\
\\lx djarala\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de sun\
\\pde kun-dung.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djaralaworrbayhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de sunrise\
\\pde dung-bebme\
\\xv Kam-djaralaworrbayhme.\
\\pde Kam-dungbebme.\
\\xe The sun is rising.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djarawa\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp\
\\re fi:Acacia_sericata\
\\de kind of acacia tree\
\\xv An-djarawa kun-dulk an-djewe, an-dulk bokenh.\
\\xe The Acacia_sericata tree is similar to fi:Acacia_aulacocarpa, they are a pair of similar trees.\
\\sc Acacia sericata\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djare\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge want\
\\re want, desire\
\\re desire, want, like\
\\re like\
\\de Want, desire, love, like.\
\\xv Ngandi-berrebbom ngan-kung waralno ya, but ngarduk kun-red konda nga-re marrek kan-marnekodjnjirrhme. Dabborrabbolk ngandi-bolkwong ngayeman nga-djare, nga-djareminj. \
\\xe They promised this place for me those honey spirits yes, but I'm going through this my country so don't get cranky with me for coming here [talking to spirit beings]. My ancestors gave me this place and I myself have a longing for this country, I have desired it.\
\\xv Ka-ngunguyngun an-dadjek ka-djare alengarre, djal ba-marnekurrmerrinj.\
\\xe She [emu] eats flowers and she likes grevillea flowers, those [flowers] are there as food for her.\
\\cf marnedjare\
\\ce love somebody, want to see somebody.\
\\xv Ngun-marnedjare.\
\\xe He wants to see you.\
\\xv Kaluk Bulanj bi-marnedjareni ngalengh bu yiman bini-merrimeninj.\
\\xe But Bulanj wanted her, so that they could get married.\
\\pdn kk= djaloy\
\
\\lx djare\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de desire\
\
\\lx djare\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de objects belonging to a deceased person\
\
\\lx djaredowen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge longing\
\\re longing for something, be starving \
\\re be starving\
\\de Be starving for something to eat; be hanging out for something, in deep desire for something.\
\\xv "Ma korlonj wardi yi-ray yi-yawan ngarrku. Nga-djare-dowen." Wam, wam, marrek bengkayi yungkih kamarrang rowk bini-marnewarlkkarrinj.\
\\xe "OK my son, you go and look for something for us. I'm really hungry." And so off he went but he didn't know that two men of Kamarrang subsection were ahead hiding from him.\
\
\\lx djarirri\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Premna_acuminata\
\\re fi:Premna_acuminata\
\\de firestick tree, a small (2-5m) shrub or tree used for fire drills\
\\sc Premna acuminata\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-djahkorl; I, W= man-djahkorl\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djarrabarndi\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Vigna_vexillata\
\\de Twining vine with perennial roots and annual slender hairy aerial stem. Leaves: trifoliate, slightly hairy both sides, centre leaflet largest, blades 70-120 mm long x 20-25 mm wide, elongated pointed tip, petiole 30-60 mm long. Flowers: pink or purple-mauve pea-flowers, 20-25 mm long, solitary or a few on long stalks. The tuber can be eaten raw. Emus eat the flowers.\
\\sc Vigna vexillata\
\\uv ?\
\\ur Kdj= an-kornak, Djnj= barddjubarr, I= bulkud\
\\dt 04/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx djarrabirlwarra\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de unidentified plant\
\\nt specimen in plant press, check.\
\
\\lx djarraddjarrah\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear type, similar to a 'fish wire' made from iron wood or turkey bush\
\\xv Djarraddjarrah yiman djalikiradj\
\\xe The fv:djarraddjarrah spear is similar to a fish wire spear.\
\\uv E.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djarradjarrak\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge fast.tempo\
\\re fast tempo or rhythmic mode\
\\de fast tempo or rhythmic mode\
\\xv Baleh ka-yime yikodjdongohdo? An-djarradjarrak.\
\\xe What's the rhythmic mode [for this song]? Fast.\
\\sd music\
\\sy djurrkdjurrkno\
\\uv Djnj, I, W\
\\ur E= djurrkdjurrkno\
\\dt 21/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djarralda\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Calophyllum.sil\
\\re fi:Calophyllum_sil\
\\de Large vine-forest tree, the wood of which is used for making fv:borndok spear throwers.\
\\sc Calophyllum sil\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-birndarah, djarralda\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Dysoxylum.oppositifolium\
\\re fi:Dysoxylum_oppositifolium\
\\de Pink mahogany tree.\
\\sc Dysoxylum oppositifolium\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djarrang\
\\ps n.\
\\de horse\
\\bw from Makassarese j\'b7rang 'horse'.\
\\xv Djarrang nawu mak birri-bengkang birri-buyika nawu dabborrabbolk nawu birri-kerrnge\
wanjh djarrang birri-bimbom.\
\\xe The horse was something different those ancestors saw for the first time from new people (ie.\
Europeans), so they painted a horse.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djarrarn\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Terminalia canescens\
\\nt what is this thing?\
\
\\lx djarrarn\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Eucalyptus sp.\
\\re Eucalyptus sp.\
\\ps n.\
\\de kind of Eucalyptus tree\
\\xv An-djarrarn malakakah.\
\\xe The fv:an-djarrarn tree is found in flat dry eucalypt country.\
\\sc Eucalypt sp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\un This name is a fi:duwa moiety name and the fi:yirridjdja moiety name is fv:djanorro.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx an-djarrarrkinj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Celtis.philippinensis\
\\re fi:Celtis_philippinensis\
\\de Jungle thicket tree usually to 10m or taller. Smooth, fleshy, globular furits to 10 mm diameter, red when ripe; single seeded. available throughout the dry season, fv:bangkerreng to fv:wurrkeng.\
\\sc Celtis philippinensis\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 07/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx Djarrawak\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de An old creek crossing between Mandilbareng and Kurrudjmuk, about a kilometre southeast of Mandilbareng outstation.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djarrawok\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Desmos_wardianus\
\\re fi:Desmos_wardianus\
\\de kind of stone country plant\
\\sc Desmos wardianus\
\\sy an-kardabad\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-kardabad, I, W= man-kardabad\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Djarrbbirn\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\xv Djarrbbirn man-kaboyahwurd kumekke.\
\\xe There is a small creek at Djarrbbirn.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx djarrbelhdjarrbelme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de play\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde didi\
\\xv Yayam kabirri-djarrbelhdjarrbelme.\
\\pde Wurdurd kabirri-didi.\
\\xe The children are playing.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djarrbelke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place, put on\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kurrme.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djarrbirlwarra\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Gardenia.megasperma\
\\re fi:Gardenia_megasperma\
\\de kind of gardenia tree\
\\xv Makka badbu mak ka-ngun, oo: mani mani an-djarrbirlwarra, \'85ka-ngun warridj. An-djarrbirlwarra, makka ka-kobun\
bad, kaluk yekke ka-dangen o maitbi kudjewk, kudjewk ka-yawoyhkimukmen wanjh ka-rradjme kono ka-yakmen\
wanjh an-darrkid lam wanjh ka-mankan ka-ngun wanjh ka-ngun munguyh ngalengarre. fi:Any_kind ngurrurdu\
ka-ngun.\
\\xe This one yes of course, it eats it too, oh this is fi:Gardenia_megasperma, which flowers some time in the wet season and the fruit is\
there in the dry season and it gets bigger in the wet season again and then when the flowers have finished these big fruit appear and\
they fall and emus eat them. It's always the food she eats. Emus eat a great variety of things.\
\\sy an-barlbbirr\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur E= man-birlhbirlh; I, W= man-barlbinj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 21/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx djarrbirn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge hollow.log.spike\
\\re hollow log spike\
\\de type of hollow log ossuary (coffin) which has a stylistic feature of two long carved spikes extending from the top\
\\xv Ya, na-kka na-buyikahme na-Marrku na-yik-Bulanj na-ni na-wu lorrkkon ka\'96lorrkkon-yo ka-rri djarrbirn walem na-wu nga-burralkmi nga-lorrkkonkurrmeng. \
\\xe And another man, the late na-Bulanj man of the Marrku clan [whose bones are] now in that hollow log ossuary, the hollow log with spikes. I put that hollow log there when I performed in that fv:lorrkkon ceremony.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 22/Jan/2012\
\
\\lx djarrdelme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de be, stand\
\\pde -di\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djarre\
\\ps adj.\
\\de distant, long way\
\\sy balay\
\
\\lx djarredjardda\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de spear grass (Sorghum sp.) variety but with smaller seeds than fv:man-bedje.\
\
\\lx djarrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de the noise long grass makes when something moves in it or shakes it.\
\\sy yarrhme\
\
\\lx djarrhmire\
\\ps v.I.\
\\de move in grass making a noise e.g. a small animal making the grass rustle as it moves\
\\xv Ngabekkang kunj kukak kadjarrhmire, ngawayalhmeng wanjh.\
\\xe I heard kangaroos rustling in the grass and so I shone (my torch).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djarridjno\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1. charcoal\
\\xv Djarridjno kabirri-mang kabirri-ngirringirrihme bim-ken.\
\\xe They get charcoal and grind it for painting.\
\\de 2. an ongoing trouble that keeps coming back and never stops. The meaning is derived from the fact\
that after a fire there always remains charcoal.\
\\xv Kabirri-djarridjmarnbun munguyh kabirri-wangbolkarren. Marrek ka-yakmen\
na-yuhyungkih birri-kadjurrinj. Bolkki yayawno marrek kabirri-bengkan wangbol ka-yo.\
\\xe When they make trouble they always keep carrying out traditional revenge. It never finishes because they have followed the first ancestors (who instigated this). Today the new generation don't know that traditional revenge obligations still occur.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djarrk-\
\\ps v. pref.\
\\ge together\
\\ge together\
\\de Together, all acting together, all.\
\\xv Karri-djarrkre.\
\\xe Lets all go together.\
\
\\lx djarrkmayemurre\
\\pr kane-\
\\ge kun-debi.term\
\\re kun-debi term\
\\de kun-debi term, you are my brother, my fv:kakkak, your sister.\
\\xv A: Kane-djarrkmayemurre kamh-re. B: Yo ngalekke kane-djarrkmayemurre.\
\\xe [Brother], here comes the one who is my mother's mother's brother and your sister. B: Yes, here [brother] is the one who is my sister and your mother's mother's brother.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 05/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx djarrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spear\
\\xv Ngune-djarrkmen!\
\\xe Spear it!\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I = -danjbun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djarrkno\
\\ps adj.\
\\de pair, two\
\\xv Yaw djarrkno.\
\\xe Twins\
\\sy bogen\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W, Kdj= boken(h)\
\\cf djarrkno na-/ ngal- /man-gudji\
\\ce three\
\\pdn kk = bulalh\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djarrwahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hop (certain macropod species specific only), pertains to the female antilopine wallaroo or fv:karndayh\
only.\
\\xv Bonj djarrwahmeng wam.\
\\xe That's it, it's hopped off, gone (ie. the female antilopine kangaroo).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djawak\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de metal knife\
\\pdn kk = djerrkudmiken.\
\\ee This is most likely a loan word but the origin of the loan is unknown.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djawan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de ask\
\\xv Minj ngad ngarri-djawan duwa 'only' yirridjdja ka-re ka-nan ka-yime mani bonj.\
\\xe This is true, yes. We people of duwa moiety cannot ask (to go there), only yirridjdja can go and look\
there. That's it.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djawaway\
\\ps n.\
\\re heavy rain\
\\de Heavy rain, appears after 'clever men' sing it into being. Also a Yabbadurrwa ancestral hero.\
\\xv Kabirri-djuhke rlangka-rlangka kabirri-wabun wanjh nungan ka-bo-bebme djawaway.\
Man-yarl ka-karrme kabirri-djuhke kure ma:k. Bu kabirri-warrewon karri-ngakme.\
\\xe They immerse the sacred mother-of-pearl shell into water they sing an incantation and then the heavy\
rain known as fv:djawaway will appear. It (rlangka-rlangka) has ceremonial string and this is put into\
the water up to a special notch marked on it. If they follow the procedure incorrectly (such as putting\
the string in too far), we will drown (from flooding).\
\\nt check, fv:rlangka-rlangka may be a secret word not for public use.\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djawinj\
\\pr gun-\
\\va djawunj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge steam\
\\re steam, fumes\
\\de Fumes, steam.\
\\ng Incorporable.\
\\xv Nga-djawinjnome.\
\\xe I can smell something cooking.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djawinjnome\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge smell.cooking\
\\re smell cooking smells\
\\de Smell cooking fumes (of OBJ).\
\\xv Ka-kanjdjawinjnome kuluban.\
\\xe He smells the flying fox meat cooking.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djawirna\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge friend\
\\re friend\
\\de Friend.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Disciple (Christianity).\
\\ur Burarra fi:jawina 'crewman, associate, co-worker in subordinate role', Iwaidja fi:jawirna 'friend', Maung fi:djawirna 'friend'.  \
\\bw Probably from Makassarese fi:toana 'guest'.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx Djawonj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E,D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djawundu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sea.eagle\
\\re white-bellied sea eagle\
\\re fi:Haliaeetus_leucogaster\
\\de White-bellied sea eagle.\
\\sc Haliaeetus leucogaster\
\\sy mibbarr\
\\ee This bird may have different colouring depending on stages of growth. The wedge-tailed eagle, fv:milarrhwaken and this bird fv:mibbarr/djawundu are classed as varieties of the same bird (by the Kuninjku).\
\\uv I\
\\ur W, Djnj, Kdj= marrawuddi\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djawunj\
\\pr gun-\
\\va djawinj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge steam\
\\re steam, fumes\
\\de Fumes, steam.\
\\ng Incorporable.\
\\xv Nga-djawinjnome.\
\\xe I can smell something cooking.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djawunjdolkkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge steam.rising\
\\re steam rising\
\\de Steam rising from the ground, particularly when the sun shines immediately after rain.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djawunjnome\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de See fv:djawinjnome.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djawurn-djawurn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge paperbark.figure\
\\re paperbark mortuary figure\
\\de Paperbark and string human figures/dolls created after the completion of mortuary ceremonies. The figures have one arm raised which indicates the direction in which the people have moved after abandoning the camp occupied by the deceased.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 17/May/2012\
\
\\lx djawurrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djawurrkno, kun-dangdjawurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge beard\
\\re beard\
\\sd body part\
\\de 1.whiskers, facial hair.\
\\de 2. facial tentacles on catfish\
\\sn 2\
\\ge ritual object\
\\re ritual totemic object\
\\de ritual totemic object used in Kunabibi ceremony and usually referred to as\
fv:djebbulano\
\\pdn kun-djakudjkudj\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx djay\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1 (man-djay)\
\\ge Hypoxis.nervosa\
\\re fi:Hypoxis_nervosa\
\\de a short fleshy grass, long tuber like roots eaten\
\\sc Hypoxis nervosa\
\\un fv:man-djay =yirridjdja moiety name, fv:burnda =duwa moiety name\
\\uv I, E\
\\xv Minj ngalkka ngurri-won kunj, karri-kaybun ngalengmanwali wardi kan-kaybun man-me man-djay.\
\\xe Don't give her (emu) any of that kangaroo meat because she is not going to share the tubers with us.\
\\sn 2 (an-djay)\
\\ge Curculigo.ensifolia\
\\re fi:Curculigo_ensifolia\
\\de Annual grass-like herb to 30 cm high from a perennial corm which is compacted, cylindrical, to 150 mm long and 10 mm wide, seasonal vertical additions can be seen as feint horizontal rings. The leaves are long, narrow, grass-like, sparsely to moderately hairy, blade 50-500 mm long x 5-25 mm wide tapering to both ends. The flower is small, yellow and tubular, to 30 mm long, appearing at ground level. The corm is eaten raw or after being cooked in hot stones or sand. The root can be pounded to break the outer skin. It is potato-like in taste.The corm is available in fv:bangkerreng 'late wet season\'92.\
\\sc Curculigo ensifolia\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur Kdj= an-mulbirrk, an-burda\
\\sy Djnj= an-burda\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djaying\
\\ps Counterfactual particle.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Expression of misapprehension.\
\\xv Djaying ba-rayinj kurih.\
\\xe I thought he was going to come (but he didn't).\
\\sn 2\
\\de Introduces falso complements of reportative verb. 'supposedly', 'that's what the claim is...'\
\\xv Djabulukku-ken barri-djareni Balanda kabarri-yawoyhbolkkarung. Wanjh djaying andi-yawoyhwokbekkayi.\
\\xe The non-ABoriginal people wanted to mine at Djabulukku again. Supposedly they were going to listen our views about the matter.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Possibly, whether or not .. (introduces predicates whose epistemic status is uncertain).\
\\xv Nakka mightbi bedberre, old man nakka ka-bengkan Wamud. Nakka djaying bedberre Wurrbbarn.\
\\xe It [a place] might belong to them, old man Wamud will know. It possibly belongs to the Wurrbbarn clan.\
\\sn 4\
\\de Expresses lack of commitment or uncertainty to the truth value or otherwise of a reported claim. 'apparently'\
\\xv Nawu namekke nawu djaying bindi-marnemonghmeninj kalngbuyh-ken?\
\\xe Didn't they use beeswax on the fv:kalngbuy 'first animal kill' ceremonial bones (when one group was making it for another)?\
\\xv Marrek karri-monan djaying ba-yimeng marrek ngurri-monan Ngabbard ngaye ngan-marneyimeng marrek ngurri-yimonan korlonj bambu yirrowen. Kurdangyini marrngkidj.\
\\xe [At the site Andirdkorrang], apparently we must not look at the those bones there. My father said to me \'93Do not look at those bones son, otherwise you can get sick/die.\'94 He was a clever man, with supernatural powers.\
\
\\lx djebbulano\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr [kun-]djebbula-no\
\\sn\
\\ge ritual object\
\\re ceremonial totemic object\
\\de ceremonial totemic object used in the Kunabibi ceremony also referred to as\
fv:djawurrkno 'beard'\
\\ee Although this word is in the public domain, further details about it are not.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx djebelh\
\\pr kun-\
\\sn 1\
\\ps n.\
\\ge foreskin\
\\re foreskin\
\\de foreskin\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 2\
\\ps adj.\
\\ng Without noun class prefix usually denotes adjective and with pronominal prefixes denotes predicate adjective.\
\\ge uncircumcised\
\\re uncircumcised\
\\de uncircumcised\
\\xv Nga-yolyolme bu ben-djobkeng bad bedda kabirri-yime yahyawurd wurduwurdurd nawu kabindi-djobke. Kure kumekke dedjmey kum-wam kunukka 'walk' kondanjbeh bebmeng, konda ben-djobkeng birri-doweng nawu yayaw. Wanjh wam koyek ben-bawong kondabu. Wanjh kondah ngarrih-di kondah nawu ngarri-djebelh.\
\\xe I'll tell you about how she [Yingarna] circumcised those children. Other Aboriginal people still circumcise young children. She walked from one place to another and she came to this country here [Alligator Rivers district]. When she circumcised the children she put here, they died. So she left them and went on to the east. So today we are non-circumcising people.\
\\sd body part\
\\so Kunwinjku Spirit book\
\\an ka-lakkayenyo, ka-berddaykan\
\\sy djabinj\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx djebelhdjobke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge circumcise\
\\re circumcise\
\\de circumcise\
\\xv Bi-djebelhdjobkeng.\
\\xe he circumcised him.\
\\sd body part\
\\sy berddadjke, berddadjdje\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, W\
\\ur I, E= berddadjdje\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx djebuy\
\\va djebuyh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge possum\
\\re possum\
\\re fi:Trichosurus_arnhemensis\
\\de Northern brushtail possum.\
\\sc Trichosurus arnhemensis\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I= durrih\
\\sd mammals\
\\dt 31/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djedbarlh\
\\va djedbarl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Arum.plant\
\\re Arum plant\
\\re fi:Amorphophallus_galbra\
\\de kind of herbaceous plant of the Arum family with a subterranean tuber which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is\
rendered edible\
\\xv Djedbarlh yiman kandidjdjowa kabirri-marnbun, kabirri-dong wanjh mimno ka-yakmen.\
\\xe They make something similar to flour from the Arum plant, they hit it until the seeds are ground up.\
\\sc Amorphophallus galbra\
\\ee There is considerable variation in shape and size of these plants and as a result, different sizes of the same species may have different\
moiety affiliations and names in Bininj Kunwok. This particualr name is the fv:yirridjdja moiety name and the fv:duwa moiety\
Kundedjwarre clan lect name is fv:walangari, these two names also being names (synonyms) for the same plant in Dalabon.\
\\sy walangari, man-mayhdedj\
\\uv I  \
\\ur Kun-walidjaw duwa clan lect name is fv:man-mayhdedj, E =man-djanek, W =man-danek, Dalabon =djedbarl,\
walangari.\
\\pdn narrenku\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx djedberdeh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Common Archerfish and Primitive Archerfish\
\\sc Toxotes chatereus and Toxotes lorentzi\
\\uv Kune Na-kerlk. Also Rembarrnga.\
\\uv I= djoloborn, W= njarlkan E (Na-rayek)= djamard.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djedbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de strip skin and flesh from bone.\
\
\\lx djedme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Scrape with a tool; carve or sculpt.\
\\xv Na-morden bolkdjedmeng kure Kukkurr.\
\\xe The Lightning Spirit carved out that place at fv:Kukkurr (fv:Kukkurr is a large red cliff on the eastern\
bank of the Liverpool river).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djedj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re kapok tree\
\\re fi:Cochlospermum fraseri\
\\de Yellow kapok bush; a slender deciduous shrub or small tree to 7 m high; flowering and fruiting when the plant is leafless. The edible fleshy taproots are collected only from small plants, usually less than 30 cm tall. They are roasted in hot coals and the outer skin peeled. Kapok wool from the seed pods is used for body decoration in certain ceremonies. Young stems can be used as firestick drills. Bark used for paint brushes.\
\\xv Buluk dorrengh anbu an-djedj, Lorrkkon Kunabibi karri-bulukmang.\
\\xe The kapok tree has down used for body decoration in the hollow log and Kunabibi ceremonies.\
\\sc Cochlospermum fraseri\
\\ee good for making dugout canoes\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djekmarrumarru\
\\ps n.\
\\de someone who is always laughing\
\\cf see fv:marrumarru.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djekme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de laugh\
\\xe Ngarri-djekmeng ngarri-doweng ngarri-bodmedadjmeng.\
\\xv We laughed until it hurt and we doubled over.\
\\xv Na-kudji na-kimukgenh borrkkeng wanjh karri-djekmeng.\
\\xe One fat man danced and we laughed (at him).\
\\pdn kk = yedjekme\
\\dt 31/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djekmino\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de generic term for seeds from most Acacias and other similar seed pod trees\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx djekmiwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de laugh at someone\
\\xv Kabi-djekmiwon.\
\\xe He's laughing at her.\
\\uv I, W\
\\ur Kdj= djekmewon\
\
\\lx djelamberd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of plant that grows in rocky gullies\
\\xv Djelamberd kuwarddewaken kulungulungurrh kuwarddedubbe.\
\\xe The fv:Acanthus ilicifolius grows in rock country, in deep crevasses, in impenetrable rock country.\
\\sc Acanthus ilicifolius\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx djelan\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djelanno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bladder\
\\de bladder\
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx Djelerrkayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Marrirn clan estate visited as a camp site not far from fv:Manbulukarri on the Liverpool\
River.\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djelhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge drip\
\\re drip\
\\de drip\
\\xv Gu-malaworrbe ka-djelhme.\
\\xe The water is dripping from a leaf.\
\
\\lx djelhmirri\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge drip\
\\re drip\
\\de Seep out, drip, exude (of fluid or gas)\
\\xv Mimnalkdjerlhmirri wanjh warrhmeng kure kun-mim nuye bi-mim-delkkeng\
kun-mimnalk wanjh mim-makminj.\
\\xe Her tears dropped from her eyes and fell into his eyes which then healed him (of his blindness).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djelk\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djelkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de gravel, small pebbles\
\\xv Djelkno birri-wayhkemeninj and warrwarrhmeninj birri-bolk-ngehngeybuyi kun-red ya.\
\\xe They lifted up gravel and as it fell to the ground they would call out the names of places (as part of an increase ritual because the gravel represents green plums at a particular fv:djang site).\
\\cf ku-djehdjedjelk\
\\ce gravel-covered country\
\\dt 02/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx djelkdjongbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge fill.with.offal\
\\re fill intestines with offal\
\\de fill intestines with fat and offal to make a kind of sausage\
\\xv Ngarri-nani ka-wukdurndeng malahmalayi. Ngarri-kinjeyi wanjh ngarri-bardngorrowkeyi ngarri-dedjbuni kaluk\
kun-balem yika ngarri-djelkdjongbuni. \
\\xe We would see them [the kangaroos] make an appearance early in the morning. We would put them in the fire [to singe the fur], then\
break the legs at the knee, cut open the guts and take the fat out and sometimes fill it inside the intestines [in the manner of a sausage].\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Djelkmerre\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\uc0\u8232 \\de Savanna area falling away to the north from the escarpment, to the west of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek and south of the Gunbalanya-Nabarlek road. The site includes a series of small creeks and there is a previously inhabited cave in the area. \
\\xv Koyekkah karrikad Djelkmerre, kun-wardde kun-rurrk, ngarri-yoy. Korroko.\
\\xe We used to camp there. We went by foot a long time ago. In the east and west to Djelkmerre, there\'92s a cave where we used to camp. A long time ago.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djelmi\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de 1.cold water, such as at the bottom of a deep stream 2. any cold substance, eg. the air from an air\
conditioner\
\\cf -djelmirranj\
\\ce become cool\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djelmirranj\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become cold (of objects)\
\
\\lx djemkorrh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de a derogatory term used to describe ceremonial initiates who do not show proper respect or behave\
improperly by breaking ceremonial law.\
\\xv Yi-djemkorrh.\
\\xe You childish fool.\
\\cf -djemkorrhbun\
\\ce break ceremonial law by improper behaviour\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djemkorrhbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de break ceremonial law by improper behaviour\
\
\\lx djen\
\\va djenno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge tongue\
\\re tongue\
\\de Tongue\
\\cf djendjad / djenwarre\
\\ce one who speaks well, fluent / someone with a speech impediment\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 2\
\\ge mussel.meat\
\\re mussel meat\
\\de The flesh of freshwater mussels.\
\\xv Narddo kaddum nakka ka-yongoyo. Nani ngarduk narddo karri-yime, arri-ngolung\
arrin-golungi, arri-lahlarrhkeyi, djenkimuk.\
\\xe Those freshwater mussels are lying all over the surface. We say 'these are my mussels' and we roast them on the fire. They have very large 'tongues' [i.e. flesh].\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 31/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djenbarlokbarlok\
\\ps n.\
\\re fast talker\
\\de Person who speaks very quickly and constantly, never shuts up.\
\\dt 08/Jan/2016\
\
\\lx djenberrdjenberr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de pigweed\
\\sc Cyanotis axillarys\
\
\\lx djendadj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de palm name\
\\sc ?\
\\so JD-D said this is a yirridjdja name for another palm CHECK\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djendek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sand.palm\
\\re sand palm\
\\re fi:Livistonia_humilis\
\\de sand palm\
\\sc Livistonia humilis\
\\sy marrabbi, man-djandadj, man-kulurrudj\
\\ee Sand palms which grow in forest habitats are said to be of fv:yirridjdja moiety and can also be called fv:man-djandadj whilst those growing in rocky habitats are said to be of fv:duwa moiety and are called marrabbi. In Kundedjnjenghmi the shorter variety is called\
fv:an-kulurrudj and the ordinary name is fv:marrabbi.\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= djankele, Djnj= an-kulurrudj, marrabbi\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djendekno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de fruity pulp, the flesh of a fruit\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx djendukkarren\
\\ps v. refl.\
\\ge tangle.words\
\\re tangle words, come to impass\
\\de Come to an impass in discussion or argument. Go around in circles in a discussion not making any resolution or concensus.\
\\xv Bonj karri-bawo, karri-djendukkarren.\
\\xe Let's leave it (stop talking about it), we can't come to an agreement.\
\\dt 01/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djendjoleng\
\\ps adj.\
\\de fluent speaker, especially of a foreign language.\
\\xv Nakka djen-djoleng ka-wokdi man-djad Balanda-ken.\
\\xe He (or she) is a good speaker, he can speak English really well.\
\
\\lx djenkehno\
\\va djenkerhno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge nest\
\\re nest (bird)\
\\re bird's nest\
\\de Bird's nest.\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W= kun-red, Kdj= kun-yed\
\
\\lx djenkererr\
\\pr man-\
\\va man-djankererr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grevillea.spp.\
\\re fi:Grevillea_heliosperma\
\\re fi:Grevillea_decurrens\
\\de Lowland variety of two grevillea spp.\
\\ee Escarpment variety of both spp. is fv:man-bardbard.\
\\sc Grevillea heliosperma, Grevillea decurrens\
\\uv E= man-djenkererr, man-djankererr\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2015\
\
\\lx djenmalukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de poke tongue out quickly as snakes and goannas do\
\\xv ka-djenmalukmalukme kalawan\
\\xe the goanna flicks it's tongue back and forwards\
\
\\lx djenmarnburren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pronounce speech correctly\
\
\\lx Djenmedj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djenj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de fish (generic)\
\\xv Bedda bene-wam daluk boken bene-mekke bene-wam wanjh bonj djenj beneh-yawam.\
\\xe There were once two women who went out looking for fish.\
\\pdn kk = korrngelk\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djenjbarrang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Mouth Almighty, a fresh water fish\
\\sc Glossamia aprion\
\\uv KW and Kundedjwarre clan lect=djabel\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Djenjkurndamen\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kulmarru clan estate, a large pool on the Mann River. Sacred site for fv:djenjkurndamen or\
River Sawfish, Pristis sp.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djenjkurndamen\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de River Sawfish\
\\sc Pristis sp.\
\
\\lx djerli\
\\va djerlih\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Mitchell's.water.monitor\
\\re Mitchell's water monitor\
\\re fi:Varanus_mitchelli\
\\de Mitchell's water monitor.\
\\sc Varanus mitchelli\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 01/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djerrbbarl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de platform, made from timber and once used to lay out the deceased. The body would lie on these\
platforms until only the bones remained.\
\\dv Balabbala nawu kun-kare bindi-barnameng birrih-doweng.\
\\sy kalawu.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djerrekko\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spotted.tree.monitor\
\\re spotted tree monitor\
\\re fi:Varanus_scalaris\
\\de Spotted tree monitor.\
\\sc Varanus scalaris\
\\xv Djerrekko ka-kayhme, an-djewk ba-yakminj.\
\\xe The spotted tree monitor calls out when the rains have stopped.\
\\uv Djnj, W \
\\ur Kdj, I= bikku\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\
\\lx djerrh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de String bag (looped or knotted) with string woven from a great variety of plant fibres including |fi\{Acacia difficilis, Acacia latifolia, Brachychiton diversifolius, Brachychiton megaphyllus, Clerodendrum floribundum, Ficus virens, Hibiscus arnhemensis, Pandanus spiralis, Pandanus aquaticus, Planchonia careya and Sterculia quadrifida.\}\
\\xv Bonj birri-bebbebkeng kun-madj nawu djerrh njalehnjale birri-kang nungka birri-wong rowk kang.\
\\xe And so they took out all their dilly bags and things they had bought, string bags or whatever and they took them and gave (the contents) to him and he took it all.\
\\pdn kk= kaledjerrk\
\\cf korndjerrhno\
\\ce scrotum\
\
\\lx djerrkudmiken\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd material_culture\
\\sn 1\
\\de metal knife\
\\sn 2\
\\de stone knife\
\\sn 3\
\\de shovel nose spear\
\\pde 1. mandjawak, 2. lama, 3. barrawu.\
\\xv Djerrkudmiken kabirri-yi-dokan kabirri-yakidjme molarrinj.\
\\pde Barrawu kabirri-yi-re kabirri-danjbun kunj.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djerrkudmiken\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd material_culture\
\\sn 1\
\\de knife\
\\sn 2\
\\de shovel nose spear.\
\\pde 1.mandjawak 2.barrawu.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djerrngkolh\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de Darwin Woollybutt tree\
\\sc Eucalyptus miniata\
\\pde man-barlanjdjarr.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djerrawo\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Cupaniopsis.anacardioides\
\\re fi:Cupaniopsis_anacardioides\
\\de Small tree (5-10m) growing in drier monsoon jungles on sandstone hills.\
\\sc Cupaniopsis anacardioides\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 01/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djewe\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_aulacocarpa\
\\de Kind of acacia tree. Flowering (around March) indicates the start of fv:bangkerreng season. Also a rich source of nectar for native honey bees. Timber used for axe handles, spear throwers, spear points and digging sticks.\
\\sc Acacia aulacocarpa\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur I, E= man-djabedj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djewk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge rain\
\\re rain\
\\de Rain.\
\\ng Takes fv:na- class agreement: fv:man-djewk_na-gimuk 'big rain'.\
\\xv Man-djewk ngan-bom ngadberre.\
\\xe The rain fell on us.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge year\
\\re year\
\\de Year (as measure of time).\
\\xv Bu man-djewkbubuyika ngarre bininj kabirri-dowkke mako man-mim lead ka-wernmerren kore ku-labbahlabbarl.\
\\xe After a number of years, people firing shotguns constantly will lead to an accumulation of lead in the billabong.\
\\pdn kk = man-djil\
\\dt 01/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djibdjib\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de termite mound, black\
\
\\lx Djibowkman\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de familiar name for the female black wallaroo usually called fv:djukerre.\
\\sc Macropus bernadus.\
\
\\lx djid\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spindle used for weaving.\
\\xv Nani bale barndadno. Kune yimeninj, med nakka,..... djid.... ngarri-dulubuyi, djid\
birdikad, ngarri-dulubuyi djid birdikad namekke berlmadmono, birri-bolk-dulubuyi kuni.\
Wanjh ka-yi-kuyengmeninj walabi nani nawu.\
\\xe Where's the bone [used for a weaving anchor]? They'd do it like this, hang on,.... we would put the\
spindle through the hole, the spindle would be tugged tight, we would put the spindle through the hole,\
the spindle would be tugged tight and that arm bone is there stuck into the ground. And by using the\
bone the fishing net would become longer.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djidberhberl\
\\va Djidbelhbel\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge prop.n.\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on the upper Mann River in country associated with the Jawoyn language. The focus is a hill with a rocky outcrop on its summit, above the east bank of the Gumardir River in the Maburrinj estate. Djidbelhbel lies about 3km south-southeast of the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River.  From fv:Djidberhberl people turned off the Mann River and walked north to Birrkaladju and on to Marlkawo.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 10/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx djiddirirrin\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de mud wasp\
\
\\lx djiddudjiddu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge paint brush\
\\re paint brush\
\\de Finest type of paint-brush, made from sedge grass fi:Cyperus_javanicus and typically used to paint fine lines such as those in cross-hatching.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 01/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djidjerok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge paperbark.sp.\
\\re paperbark tree with water in trunk\
\\de Any kind of paperbark (fi:Melaleuca spp.) which stores water in the trunk.\
\\ee The side of the tree is struck with an axe to allow water to pour out. These trees are used as an emergency water supply when other fresh water is not available. The water in these trees tends to be slightly brackish.\
\\sc Melaleuca nervosa\
\\xv Nawu djidjerok, man-kod man-mak, la man-birdubirdu man-bahbang.\
\\xe With the water tree Melaleucas, the large tea trees are drinkable but the water from the\
fv:man-birdubbirdu Melaleucas is foul.\
\\sd plant\
\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djidjnguk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de dwarf spirit being. Some are said to inhabit the honey dreaming country in Mok clan estate.\
\\xv Name nungan djenj ka-ngun djidjnguk nakka.\
\\xe Those djidjnguk spirits eat fish.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djikdulh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\ee Kune-Dangbon country starts from here. (DK)\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djikirrh\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'snatch'\
\\xv Kam-bid-worrwam, djikirrh!, bi-karrmeng.\
\\xe His hands fell upon him and 'snatch', he grabbed him.\
\
\\lx djikirridjdjikirridj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge willy.wagtail\
\\re willy.wagtail\
\\de Willy wagtail. Possibly also the grey fantail.\
\\sc Rhipidura leucophrys, Rhipidura fuliginosa\
\\sd birds\
\
\\lx djikka\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pipe\
\\re smoking pipe\
\\re pipe for smoking tobacco\
\\de Long smoker's pipe.\
\\bw Makassarese fi:patti 'chest, case' and fi:kalling 'tin, can'; Iwaidja fi:patjukaling 'large container, drum' and Burarra fi:bajikala 'long smoking pipe'. \
\\sy fv:badj (I)\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djikka\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djikkano\
\\ps n.\
\\ge breast\
\\re breast\
\\re nipples, teats\
\\de Breasts, nipple, teats.\
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx Djikkabbal\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate, birthplace of David Karlbuma\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\xv Djikkabbal kun-red kure Kamarrang danginj.\
\\xe Djikkabbal is the place where Kamarrang was born.\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djikkakurrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de breast milk\
\
\\lx djikkagodjgurrkyakmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge breasts.dry.up\
\\re breasts go dry\
\\de Breasts go dry.\
\\xv Ngal-badjan ba-djikkakodjkurrkyakminj.\
\\xe The mother's breasts went dry.\
\
\\lx djikkamanem\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djikkamanemno\
\\ps n.\
\\mr djikka+manem 'breast+sternum'\
\\ge sternum\
\\re sternum\
\\re chest centre\
\\de chest area between the two nipples, the skin over the sternum\
\\sd body part\
\\sy kun-manem, kun-berrekalk\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx djikkamanemdadjke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr djikka+manem+dadjke 'breast+chest+cut'\
\\ge cut.breast.cicatrice\
\\re scar the skin on the sternum with a traditional cicatrice\
\\de Cut the skin on the sternum to produce a traditional cicatrice\
\\xv Yimarnkek bu mane manu birri-lakkayenwon yimankek bu ngaye wanjh konda ngane-dadjkemeninj konda, ngandi-\
djikkamanemdadjkemeninj bu mankudji. Dja nawu birri-dangerrinj nakka ku-karre kure kabirri-dadjkerren. Dja\
nawu bindi-bornang nakka ku-karlang kabirri-dadjkerren, yoh. \
\\xe When he was circumcised then me as the mother, we were both cut at the same time and I was cut here, a tribal scar they cut me on the\
middle of the chest, just one incision. But if the boy has a sister they [the sisters] cut themselves on the lower leg. And if it is the boy's\
father's sister they cut themselves on the shoulder, yes.\
\\sd body part\
\\so Margaret at Manmoyi\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx djikkamimno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de tip of nipple\
\
\\lx djikkawon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge breast-feed, suckle\
\\de breast-feed, suckle\
\\xv Kabi-yawdjikkawon.\
\\xe She's breast-feeding the baby.\
\\dt 04/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djikkilirri\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge northern.rosella\
\\re northern rosella\
\\de Northern rosella\
\\sc Platycercus venustus\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur I, Djnj= djaddokorddokord\
\\sn 2\
\\ge hooded.parrot\
\\re hooded parrot\
\\de Hooded parrot (rare).\
\\sc Psephotus dissimilis\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur I, Djnj= djaddokorddokord\
\\sd birds\
\
\\lx djikkayi\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge II-breast-COM\
\\re having breasts\
\\de Having breasts, adult female.\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djil\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd geographic\
\\de rain\
\\pde man-djewk\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx djila\
\\ps n.\
\\de salt\
\\bw from Makassarese c\'c8?la 'salt(y), brackish'\
\
\\lx djila\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kun-djirla\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de axe\
\\sy kurlbburru\
\\pdn kk = lambuwa\
\
\\lx djilabbang\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de the inner part of a bag\
\\sn 2\
\\de the magazine of a gun.\
\
\\lx Djilabihbim\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\ee 'mimih place'\
\\uv E, D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djilarddjilard\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de lily\
\\sc Crinum angustifolium, Crinum uniflorum\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\ur I= kurlumudduk\
\
\\lx djilawarnbed\
\\ps n.\
\\ge millipede\
\\re millipede\
\\de Giant millipede.\
\\xv Djilwarnbed nadjinem, nadjinem ka-ngun ka-marnbun kun-balem.\
\\xe The black wallaroo eats millipedes and it makes them fat.\
\\sd insects\
\
\\lx djilbirdinjno\
\\va denge-djilbirdinjno\
\\sd body part\
\\ps n.\
\\de toes\
\\xv Kunj dengedjilbirdinjno\
\\xe Kangaroo toe.\
\
\\lx djilibba\
\\ps n.\
\\de light footwear such as thongs or sandals\
\\bw from English 'slippers'\
\
\\lx djilikuybirr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge whistle.duck\
\\re wandering whistle duck\
\\re whistle duck\
\\de Wandering whistle duck.\
\\sc Dendrocygna arcuata\
\\uv W, I\
\\ur Kdj= djirrbiyuk\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx djilimin\
\\ps n.\
\\de itch, fungal rash\
\\uv W\
\\uv I,E= burrabburra\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djilinno\
\\va kun-djilin\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\ge crest\
\\re crest\
\\de crest, especially on the head of certain birds but also the tassled head decoration on rainbow serpents\
\\ng incorporable\
\\xv Rakul kukbuyika, ku-wardde ka-rri wanjh bamkarnamalkmalk,\
warddeken kudjambudda, djilinkuyeng kodjmudno nawu.\
\\xe The ordinary partridge pigeon is different. The rock partridge pigeon lives in the rock country, it's a rock dweller on the flat rocky\
platforms and has a longer crest, the feather on its head.\
\\sy dabberrk, kodjmudno\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 31/Mar/2007\
\
\
\\lx djiliwirn\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Capparis.umbonata\
\\re fi:Capparis_umbonata\
\\re wild orange tree\
\\de Wild orange tree; round golf ball-sized edible fruit.\
\\sc Capparis umbonata\
\\uv I\
\\ur Djnj= kandirrikkal, Kdj= bukbuk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djilname\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de continue with ceremonial singing after the completion of one part. "Keep going in ceremony, finish im\
song and fv:karri-djilname, keep goin'."\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djilowhmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de wade through water\
\\xv Nga-djowkkeng kure bo-lobmeng, nga-djilowhmiwam wanjh ngan-denge-wawahkeng.\
\\xe I waded across where the water was running fast and the current nearly forced me off my feet.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djiluh\
\\ps ideoph.\
\\de sound made when hitting the water to frighten crocodiles away.\
\\xv "Ngane-rawoyh-bo-rrong," wanjh bene-bo-rroy djiluh djiluh djiluh bene-bo-rroy.\
\\xe "Let's hit the water," and so they hit the water, 'splash! splash! splash!', they both hit the water.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djimarr\
\\ps prop n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de Name of crow creation ancestor. Sacred sites at Kudjarnngal and Kurrurldurl.\
\
\\lx djimburr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de plant with tuber and climbing vine. Leaves lanceolate. This plant is a bigger version of fv:man-ngalinj\
and is said to grow in the area around Bolkdjam. fv:man-ngalinj is said to be the smaller common\
variety.\
\\sc check.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djimburrkula\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Balngarra clan estate\
\\uv Kune/Dangbon\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djimdjim\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de water pandanus tree\
\\xv Arri-wam kanjdji kuluban arri-yikang Dabbul arri-yoy nawu arri-djalbom ka-yime an-djimdjimkah.\
\\xe We went down [to the water] to get flying foxes at Dabbul which is where we camped to hunt flying fox in the water pandanus.\
\\sc Pandanus aquaticus\
\\pdn kk = kun-yaril\
\\uv I, E =man-djimdjim, Djnj, Kdj =an-djimdjim\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djimed\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de Kind of small tree (5-8m) growing in stone country habitat with fleshy 2-3cm globular edible fruit which appears in the dry season (July-December).\
\\ee Black wallaroos also eat this fruit when it falls to the ground and the area under these trees is often cleared by black wallaroos searching for the fruit.\
\\xv An-mamkorn, an-djimed ka-ngun barrk kabirri-bolkbirrhme kanjdji kabirri-yawan barnemno.\
\\xe The black wallaroos eat the fi:Ficus_subpubarula and fi:Planchonella_pohlmaniana fruits and rake up the area under the trees as they\
search for the fruit.\
\\sc Planchonella pohlmaniana\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\de 2\
\\de kind of tree\
\\sc Planchonella arnhemica\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= man-balmed, Kdj= an-balmed\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Djimerre\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de A re-entrant in the valley of Tin Camp Creek, around 22.5km southeast of Gunbalanya. Significant as the site of a former habitation cave, rock art sites and archaeological excavation carried out by Carmel Schrire in the 1960s. The exact coordinates of the site have not been recorded.\
\\xv Kabo Kaworrkdjubmirri, kah-re ngamed kore Djimerre ya. Kuredkuken arri-yongoyoy. Ngalengman kanjdji ka-djale. Koreh bukka man-berrk manekke kaberrkyirriyo makka Birrirddak, konda kakarri, ka-wukkarri nanu Birrirddak. \uc0\u8232 \\xe Kabo Kaworrkdjubmirri goes on to Djimerre, yeah. These are traditional places where we camped. Downstream it keeps going. There is a large stretch of savanna which is associated with Birrirddak here in the west, that\'92s the area called Birrirddak.\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Djimubarn\uc0\u8232 \\ps place n.\u8232 \\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\u8232 \\de Rock shelter within the sandstone outlier which lies to the west of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek and north of the Gunbalanya-Nabarlek road. The site is in a small valley at the base of an overhang. There are large boulders blocking the front, requiring clambering to enter. The main gallery contains extensive recent phase art predominantly in white clay. A further gallery to the left (west) has several very old red hand stencils including several 3MF (\'91three middle finger\'92 designs). The site was still sometimes used until recently. Joseph Girrabul stated in 1989 that a large bichrome (white with red outline) crocodile there was painted by his father Madjumbu. \u8232 \\sd placename\u8232 \\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djimurru\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de wind which blows from the east\
\\xv Djimurru-ko kun-kurra ka-bun koyek-beh.\
\\xe In the east wind season the wind blows from the east.\
\
\\lx Djinbiri\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site on a tributary which meets the upper East Alligator River from the west. This may be the creek which meets the East Alligator from the west at Ngalwanjdjarri. Karnarra is on this same tributary. \
\\xv Walem bad Djinbiri, Karnarra, Kubowo.\
\\xe Then to the south is Djinbiri, Karnarra and Kubowo.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 4/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx djindeno\
\\va man-djinde\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de new shoot or bud on the stem or branch of a plant or tree.\
\\xv Kumekke ka-wohkir mani kaddum an-djindeno, djendeno ka-durndulubun an-behberl an-djinde ka-rri wurd ka-durndulubun ngarduk.\
\\xe There are some new small green buds halfway up all shooting out on the branches for me, new shoots.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djindibi\
\\va Yindiwi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of four different patriclans, one in Kakadu National Park, another associated with the Amurdak language and pronounced fv:Yindiwi, the third a Kunwinjku fi:yirridjdja moiety clan located in the region near the mouth of the Goomadeer [Kumadderr] River\
and the fourth, an extinct Kunwinjku Djindibi in the Kuborlomborlom region.\
\\ee The clan known as fv:Yindiwi on Van Diemen's Gulf is cognate with fv:Djindibi and is the Iwaidja and Amurdak version of the same name, the 'dj' and ''b' having undergone a process of lenition.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 22/May/2007\
\
\\lx djindju\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de native cherry\
\\sc Exocarpus latifolius\
\\ee red fruit eaten\
\\dt 08/May/2007\
\
\\lx djinem\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge paperbark.dish\
\\re paperbark dish\
\\de Paperbark dish, the ends of which are tied up with string. Used to hold liquids, ochre, or slices of yam soaking in water in order to detoxify them.\
\\sd material_culture\
\
\\lx djinembu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de marlin\
\\ee 'Yiman warlkkarra kukno la na-kimukken'.Kuk-kuyeng kurrurla ka-re.\
\\xe A fish with the shape of an oxeye herring but very large. It has a large body and is a salt water fish.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djinhdjinhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Be speckled, spiked.\
\\xv Yi-mokdjinhdjinhmeng?\
\\xe Did you get a rash?\
\
\\lx djinhno\
\\ps n.\
\\de (of plants) thorn, spike\
\\xv Yi-nahnarrimen ka-djinh wardi ngun-derrme!\
\\xe Look out, it has thorns, it might spike you!\
\\sd plant\
\\se dedjdjinhdjinh\
\\de Saw-shelled turtle, so named because of the serrations on the edge of the shell.\
\\dt 17/Aug/2014\
\
\\lx djinkurlk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de seed of the pandanus fruit, eaten\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =korrmo\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djinwel\
\\pr kun-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n. \
\\ge labia\
\\re labia\
\\de Labia.\
\\uv Kdj= kun-djinwel, W= man-djinwel\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 07/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djing\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de bum, buttocks\
\\pde kun-dedj.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djingarrarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge darter\
\\re Australian darter\
\\re fi:Anhinga_melanogaster_novaehollandiae\
\\de Australian darter\
\\sy man-djangarli\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= kunbad karrulubun, W= kardabaybay, kunwardde karrulubun.\
\\sc Anhinga melanogaster novaehollandiae\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djingkorrk\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Flying fox (any).\
\\pde kuluban, na-kayalak, murru\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djingronj\
\\va dedjronj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Merten's Water Goanna\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde burarr.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djirdabbadj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mangrove.worm\
\\re mangrove worm\
\\de Mangrove worm (Teredo worms) extracted from mangrove timber and eaten. \
\\ee Mangrove worms are actually marine bivalve molluscs. The animal excavates a hole through the wood, and the wood shavings are swallowed into the stomach which becomes a distended bag much like that of a worm thus the name. They are removed from the mangrove wood with axes and eaten raw after discarding the bivalve shells and the contents of the stomach.\
\\sc Teredo spp.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\
\\lx djirdda\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.dealbata\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_dealbata\
\\de Paperbark sp.\
\\sc Melaleuca dealbata\
\\sy mabbarra\
\\uv I\
\
\\lx djirddidjirddu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de a grass sp. used to make tiny brushes for painting cross-hatching on bark paintings.\
\\sc Cyperas javanicus\
\\sn 2\
\\de long dorsal fin of saratoga fish which is also used to make paintbrushes.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djirdmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de steal\
\\xv Nangale djirdmey kun-madj ngarduk?\
\\xe Who stole my clothes?\
\
\\lx djirdu\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Drypetes.lasiogyna\
\\re fi:Drypetes_lasiogyna\
\\de kind of tree generally 5-10m high which grows in monsoon vine thickets near permanent water and with red fruit which appears in the\
middle dry season\
\\sc Drypetes lasiogyna\
\\sy man-wurrbbu\
\\uv I\
\\ur\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Aidia.racemosa\
\\re fi:Aidia_racemosa\
\\de large (5-15m) monsoon vine-forest tree associated with permanent freshwater streams\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur I= kabirlekan, Djnj= an-marredondolem\
\\sy mulunjmulunj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 04/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx djirla\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de steel axe\
\\sy kurlbburru\
\
\\lx djirndih\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Most larger quails e.g. stubble quail, brown quail, chestnut-backed button-quail.\
\\sc Coturnix pectoralis, Coturnix ypsilophora, Turnix castanota\
\\uv Kdj, Djnj\
\\sy I, W = djiribbidj, mehme. E= merhmerh\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djinirrinj\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\va djirnirrinj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mistletoe\
\\re mistletoe\
\\de Various mistletoe spp.\
\\xv Bu arri-nan yiman marrkidjbu, an-djirnirrinj ka-rri ngalyod ngalengarre, ngaleng ku-rrulk ka-yo. Kabi-mulewan, mayh ka-yo ngarri-yime wardi kan-bun, kan-ngun.\
\\xe When we see it, a 'clever man' (person with supernatural ability) will see it, a mistletoe (which) belongs to the rainbow serpent, it is her plant and she lives inside that (particular) tree. He will tell (us) that she is there, we say that she lives there and we must beware otherwise she will kill us and consume us.\
\\xv Man-djirnerrinj ka-wohbelbme.\
\\xe The mistletoe attaches itself halfway up (other plants).\
\\ee A mistletoe hanging from a large tree can in certain cases be a sign that a rainbow serpent lives inside that particular tree.\
\\sc Decaisnina signata, Decaisnina brittenii, Decaisnina petiolata, Amyema sanguineum var. pulchrum\
\\uv I, E, W= man-djirnirrinj, Djnj, Kdj= an-djirnirrinj\
\\ur Dalabon= djirnirrinj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djirnidjirnirrinjken\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bird sp.\
\\re mistletoe bird\
\\de Mistletoe bird. THe name literally means 'of the mistletoe'. The mistletoe bird feeds exclusively on fruits of mistletoe.\
\\sc Dicaeum hirundinaceum\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= dinjh\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 12/Apr/2012\
\
\\lx djiribidj\
\\pr man-\
\\va man-djiribbidj, man-djirbbidj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge billy.goat.plum\
\\re billy goat plum tree\
\\re fi:Terminalia_ferdinandiana\
\\de Billy goat plum tree.\
\\xv Man-djiribidj man-kurlkkah.\
\\xe The fi:Terminalia_carpentariae (fruit) is gathered from the ground.\
\\sc Terminalia ferdinandiana\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx djiribbidj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Most larger quails eg. stubble quail, brown quail, and chestnut-backed button-quail. In Kundedjnjenghmi this name refers only to the brown quail.\
\\sc Coturnix pectoralis, Coturnix ypsilophora, Turnix castanota \
\\sy mehme (I), merhmerh (E)\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj, W= djirndih\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djirke\
\\va -djirike\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cover with fluid, as something bursts open or shoots out.\
\\xv Kun-nud dolkkang bi-keb-delkkeng manekke wanjh ka- keb-djirke ngal-ngamed, rakul.\
\\xe The pus shot out and splashed him on the nose, what's-his-name, partridge pigeon.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djirunghdjirungh\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge pallid.cuckoo\
\\re pallid cuckoo\
\\re fi:Cuculus_pallidus\
\\de Pallid Cuckoo\
\\sc Cuculus pallidus\
\\xv Ngalekke djirungh-djirungh ka-wokdi man-dudjmi ka-mulewan.\
\\xe The Pallid Cuckoo calls out and announces the coming into season of the green plum fruits.\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 2\
\\ge INTERJ.\
\\re interjection when hitting green plum trees\
\\de Special interjection called out when throwing a large rock at fv:man-dudjmi tree trunks to make the green fruits fall down in large numbers.\
\\xv Ngarri-yime "djirunghdjirungh" wanjh ngarri-dulkdong kun-warddeyih, ka-warrhmerren ku-kurlk wanjh ngarri-mang ngarri-ngun.\
\\xe We call out 'djirungh-djirungh' when we hit the green plum fi:(Buchanania_obovata) tree with a rock, they fall down and we get them and eat them.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djirunghdjirungh\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Open savanna plain in the Yanjkobarnem estate. This is just south of the headwaters of the Goomadeer on the escarpment, however the water flows east from here in the direction of Kabulwarnamyo outstation. The outstation is about 26 kilometres to the east.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djirrbara\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de language name, generic for all Liverpool River district languages: Ndj\'c8bbana, Kun-barlang and\
N\'b7kkara.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djirrbaykbayk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de serpent relating to wubarr mythology\
\\sy dadbe\
\
\\lx djirrbi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fish.carrying.stick\
\\re fish carrying stick\
\\de A stick used to carry fish, the stick being inserted through the gills and out of the mouth.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 17/May/2012\
\
\\lx djirrbirli\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rainbow.fish\
\\re rainbow fish\
\\re fi:Melanotaenia_splendida_inornata\
\\re chequered rainbow fish\
\\de Chequered rainbow fish; totem in the fv:lorrkkon ceremony performed by Kuninjku people\
\\sc Melanotaenia splendida inornata\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 31/Oct/2011\
\
\\lx djirrbiwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de attach string or hook to a fish eg. to carry or to use as bait.\
\\xv Yi-djirrbiwo ba nga-babbilibun.\
\\xe Tie up the fish (usually with a vine through the gills) so I can carry them on a stick.\
\
\\lx djirridjbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de wash, clean something with water\
\
\\lx djirrihdih\
\\ps n.\
\\de Smaller quail species; king quail and possibly also the red-chested button quail.\
\\xv Djirrihdih ku-rralkkeno, yahwurd, merhmerh na-kimuk.\
\\xe The king quail lives in grassland and is small, the other quail species are bigger.\
\\sc Coturnix chinensis, Turnix pyrrhothorax\
\\uv E\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx djirrihdiddid\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kingfisher.spp.\
\\re kingfisher spp.\
\\re azure kingfisher\
\\re sacred kingfisher\
\\re red-backed kingfisher\
\\re forest kingfisher\
\\re mangrove kingfisher\
\\re fi:Alcedo_azurea\
\\re fi:Todiramphus (Halcyon) sancta\
\\re fi:Todiramphus (Halcyon) pyrrhopygia\
\\re fi:Todiramphus (Halcyon) macleayii\
\\re fi:Halcyon senegaloides\
\\de Generic term for most kingfishers (sacred kingfisher, red-backed kingfisher, forest kingfisher, mangrove kingfisher and azure kingfisher).\
\\sc Todiramphus (Halcyon) sancta, Todiramphus (Halcyon) pyrrhopygia, Todiramphus (Halcyon) macleayii, Halcyon senegaloides, Alcedo azurea\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 08/Jan/2009\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= djurk, Kdj, Djnj= djirrirdirdi, Djnj= djuk 'azure kingfisher (only)'\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djirrirdirdi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kingfisher.spp.\
\\re kingfisher spp.\
\\re azure kingfisher\
\\re sacred kingfisher\
\\re red-backed kingfisher\
\\re forest kingfisher\
\\re mangrove kingfisher\
\\re fi:Alcedo_azurea\
\\re fi:Todiramphus (Halcyon) sancta\
\\re fi:Todiramphus (Halcyon) pyrrhopygia\
\\re fi:Todiramphus (Halcyon) macleayii\
\\re fi:Halcyon senegaloides\
\\de Generic term for most kingfishers (sacred kingfisher, red-backed kingfisher, forest kingfisher, mangrove kingfisher and azure kingfisher).\
\\sc Todiramphus (Halcyon) sancta, Todiramphus (Halcyon) pyrrhopygia, Todiramphus (Halcyon) macleayii, Halcyon senegaloides, Alcedo azurea\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 08/Jan/2009\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur E= djurk, I= djirrihdiddid, Djnj= djuk 'azure kingfisher (only)'\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djirrkkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re push against\
\\de Push against.\
\\xv Minj ka-wurrme murrikang karri-djirrkkan.\
\\xe The car won't start, let's push it.\
\\xv Bi-kukdjirrkkang.\
\\xe She pushed him.\
\\se kebdjirrkkan\
\\de Place under duress, force someone to do something.\
\\xv \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kabindikebdjirrkkan kurebeh kondabeh.\
\\xe They are under duress from all directions
\fs30 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 this way and that way.\
\\dt 17/Sep/2016\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\\lx djirrkkinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge little.woodswallow\
\\re little woodswallow\
\\re fi:Artamus_minor\
\\de Little wood swallow.\
\\sc Artamus minor\
\\sy bob\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 2\
\\ge white-breasted.wood.swallow\
\\re fi:Artamus_leucorhynchus\
\\de White-breasted wood swallow.\
\\sc Artamus leucorhynchus\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 3\
\\ge rabbit.rat\
\\re brush-tailed rabbit rat\
\\re fi:Conilurus_penicillatus\
\\de Brush-tailed rabbit rat.\
\\sc Conilurus penicillatus\
\\sd mammal\
\\sn 4\
\\ge grassland.melomys\
\\re grassland melomys\
\\de Grassland melomys\
\\ee Names for small rodents are often confused because many different species look quite similar. Some speakers are lax in naming conventions, and sometimes use a single name to refer to a number of different species. Note the polysemy/metonymy for woodswallow and grassland melomys/delicate mouse. It is not clear what the semantic grounds are for this metonymy.\
\\sc Melomys burtoni\
\\pdn kk = murlbbu\
\\sd mammal\
\\lf polysemy\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djirrngala\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cascade\
\\re cascade, small waterfall\
\\de cascade, small waterfall or typically a series falling down a cliff or slope in stages\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 11/Apr/2011\
\
\\lx Djiwirdi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djobboh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de grey butcherbird\
\\sc Cracticus torquatus\
\\xv Warrkdjird muddadjdadjmiken baybul kune ka-wukyime, nakka djobboh\
mudbameng.\
\\xe The pied butcherbird is piebald (patches of black and white), that's what it's like, but the grey butcherbird has lighter coloured feathers.\
\\ee The grey butcherbird and the pied butcherbird are sometimes both referred to as fv:djobbo by some speakers, although the pied butcherbird is called fv:warrkdjird by older and more knowledgeable speakers.\
\\dt 12/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx Djobborndirridj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re Djorrorlam clan place name\
\\de place in the Djorrorlam clan estate of Bamo\
\\ee Other sites nearby are fv:Djak_Kirnekarrng and fv:Narlangak_Djang.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djobke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge cut\
\\re cut\
\\de Cut; cut off, end (a process or activity).\
\\sn 2\
\\ge draw.line\
\\re draw a line\
\\de Draw a line on something.\
\\xv Kun-nodjbe arri-dulkdjobke, arri-dulkdjobke kun-kurlk. Nga-rrulkdjobke wanjh na-kohbanj ba-yakminj that old man finish ba-yakminj na-kohbanj nga-rrulkdjobke wanjh arri-re arri-warlbun mayh arri-yawan djenj.\
\\xe We draw a line on the tree trunk with red ochre, we mark the tree with clay. I draw a line around the trunk of the tree so that when that old man died, when he finished then I must draw lines around the trees and then we can go hunting in those places, looking for game or fishing.\
\\pdn dilhge\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\uv I, E= dadjke\
\\cf berddjobke\
\\ce circumcise\
\\cf diledjobge\
\\ce stop OBJ urinating before finished, interrupt someone in the midst of urinating\
\\cf gorddjobge\
\\ce stop OBJ defaecating before finished, interrupt someone in the midst of defaecating\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djobme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge cut.off\
\\re finish up\
\\re cut off\
\\re come to an end\
\\de Finish up, cut off, come to an end.\
\\xv That bolkno, Warlang Karrulkkarrme, Dedjbang ka-djobme, beh duwa. \
\\xe That place Warlang Karrulkkarrme, and then at Dedjbang, that\'92s where it finishes, [i.e. the border between two clan estates] and that's fv:duwa moiety country this way.\
\\xv Ba-djalni, an-djewk ba-djobmi.\
\\xe He used to wait here until the rains stopped.\
\\dt 08/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djodben\
\\ps n.\
\\de 'short pants'\
\\xv Berelh, yo marebu birri-barrhburrimeninj yiman ka-yime 'djodben-yak' la nakka\
birri-barrhburrimeninj.\
\\xe They used to dress with pubic coverings made from bark fibre or pandanus when there were no short pants, so that's what they covered themselves with.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djodded\
\\va djoded\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de northern nail-tail wallaby\
\\sc Onychogalea unguifera\
\\sy ngolomorro\
\\uv E, Djnj\
\
\\lx djodj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de centipede\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= djaled\
\
\\lx djoh\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.difficilis\
\\re fi:Acacia_difficilis\
\\de kind of common yellow-flowering acacia\
\\xv Birri-nani bidbuni, kah-kongun, birri-bidbuni. Yika birri-nani nawu kure ku-rurrk kah-yo man-djoh birri-kodjdukkadukkarreni dabborrabbolk. Man-djoh mani yi-na. Konda ka-rri man-djoh. Ya. Birri-nani birri-djohbuni. Mankung-ken mak ngurri-bengkan birri-kodjdukkarreni korroko. En birri-nani bi-kodjdukkadukkarreni bonj birri-djalyikani manekke kuyinhkuyinbayemeninj namekke bayemeninj man-djoh, yakanjdji kombard birri-mayi. Birri-nanganayi birri-kebbadjdjeyi kundulk-yih.\
\\xe They would see one and climb up and it would be eating flowers and they would climb up. Sometimes they would see one in a cave and they would tie Acacia difficilis around their heads, the old people. This is Acacia difficilis here, you look. Yeah. They'd see one and\
get Acacia difficilis bark. It's the same stuff used as a honey dipping brush and you know the old people used to tie it around their heads and they'd take it and when the snake would be about to bite them, it would bite a bundle of Acacia difficilis bark instead and they would then grab it around the neck behind the head. Then they'd whack its head on a tree. \
\\xv An-kung njamed an-djoh an-djoh makka anbu barri-kurlahwerrkbuni ya kareh mulkanjno arri-mangi arri-yirrmi barri-bayiyih an-kung arri-barungi.\
\\xe With respect to honey, they used to strip off the inner bark of fi:Acacia_difficilis, soak it in the honey and then suck the honey from it.\
\\xv Nani mak modjarrkki manj manjh wardi yiman man-djoh ka-kuyinkobun, en ka-wirlarrkdudjeng. \
\\xe The freshwater crocodile is a bit later however [than the saltwater crocodile], at the time just before when fi:Acacia_difficilis first starts flowering, that's when it buries its eggs.\
\\xv An-djoh arri-marnbun an-kung arri-barung. Mekem jodwan, arri-mimdukkan an-djoh, laikajad that bu an-djoh... an-kung arri-dukkan arri-baye arri-barung an-kung djohno mani an-djoh ngalengman an-kung yimiwo.\
\\xe We used fi:Acacia_difficilis to make brushes to soak up honey. We'd make a short [brush] to a point from fi:Acacia_difficilis like that... we'd tie it up, soak up the honey and suck on it, that fi:Acacia_difficilis is for use with honey.\
\\sc Acacia difficilis\
\\ee The inner bark of fi:Acacia_difficilis is used to make string (by rolling the fibres on the thigh into two ply string). It is also used as a sponge to soak up honey from hives. As a rough kind of rope the bark is quickly stripped and used to tie up the legs of macropods\
when cooking them in a ground oven. The wood can be used for man-berlnginj 'clap sticks', axe handles and digging sticks. The green seed pods produce soapy suds when rubbed in water.\
\\cf midjohdjodjo\
\\ce Grove of fi:Acacia_difficilis, wattle scrub.\
\\sd plant\
\\p DSC01628\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djohbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge strip.acacia.bark\
\\re strip bark from fi:Acacia_difficilis tree\
\\de strip bark off the fi:Acacia_difficilis tree.\
\\xv Barri-barungi an-djoh, nga-djohbom.\
\\xe They'd paint the Acacia (bark) with it [honey], I got the Acacia bark off [the Acacia difficilis tree].\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djohdjodjoh\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de grove of Acacia difficilis trees.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\lx djohme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re cough\
\\de Cough.\
\\xv Kangurdke kore karridjohme bu karribarurren kukodj, kadjale kanjdji kurrenge.\
\\xe It stops us from coughing when we rub [a special white ochre] over ourselves from head to foot.\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 196\
\\id DK\
\\dt 30/Jul/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx djohno\
\\ps n.\
\\de hole in tree where honey hive can be found or a nest for any animal that lives inside the hollows of tree\
trunks.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djok\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of three different fi:duwa moiety patriclans, one in the Tin Camp Creek and Myra Falls region, the second in Kakadu National Park and a third on the lower Liverpool River\
\\ee The Liverpool River Djok clan is also known by the synonym fv:Djokwarndarr and also has an equivalent fv:yikurrumu (ritualistic) name of fv:Namelkmelk\
\\xv A:Birri-kodbarrebom dolobbo, birri-dakmeng. B:Kumekke Ngalirrikewern? A: Yo wanjh kun-red bedberre birri-mey,\
na-Djokyih.\
\\xe A: They made house with stringy bark, they peeled it off the trees. B: There at Ngalirrkewern? A: Yes, they made their camp there, in\
Djok country.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Djokay\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Djordi clan estate with extensive rock art galleries.\
\
\\lx djokbin\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de unidentified snake ,black and grey, (belongs to the 'ngal-' noun class).\
\
\\lx djokko\
\\ps adj.\
\\de narrow, tight, appears in compounds 'mim-djokko', 'barle-djokko'\
\\cf Kubarrarn-djokko.\
\\ce Narrow passage\
\
\\lx djokkome\
\\xv kunak kabandjokkohmikan kunj, kabandjokkome kabandjirrkkan kure Bininj kabarri-di kure kukebrok \
\
\\lx djokkohmikan\
\\xv kunj kabarri-djokkohmikan\
\
\\lx Djokkorlo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate near Mann River. Bamboo spear site.\
\
\\lx djokkorranj\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become tight or narrow\
\\xv Werrk karri-lawkmang la dolobbo ka-kuk-djokkorran.\
\\xe Let's get stringybark quickly otherwise it will get too tight to remove (due to the onset of the dry\
season).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djokwarndarr\
\\va Djok\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan clan on the lower Liverpool River region\
\\xv Yoh na-Djokwarndarr. Kam-djale kondah konda wanjh ka-burnbun... Konda ka-ngurdme, Djabel...\
\\xe Yes, Djokwarndarr clan. It comes up this way [towards Yikarrakkal] and finishes ... here it finishes at Djabel...\
\\xv A: Kunumidjarda, en nga-nang barrarnno. B: Barrarnno yoh, ngalengh barrarnno wanjh makka, Kunumidjarda,\
na-Djokwarndarrken.\
\\xe I saw gorges at Kunumidjarda. B: Gorges, yes, there are gorges there at Kunumidjarda, in the Djokwarndarr clan estate.\
\\ee This is another name for the Liverpool River Djok clan estate.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so Mick Kubarkku file RA97-1\
\\sy Djok\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx djola\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Syzygium.fruit\
\\re Syzygium fruit (large kind)\
\\de Large variety of fruit from the fv:an-djalbbirdo tree; ordinary and small sized fruit is called fv:an-djalbbirdo\
\\sc Syzygium eucalyptoides ssp. bleeserii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djoloborn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Common archerfish and primitive archerfish. Associated with the fv:yirridjdja moiety.\
\\xv Djoloborn kun-nunj ka-we.\
\\xe The rifle fish throws its spit.\
\\sc Toxotes chatereus, Toxotes lorentzi\
\\uv I\
\\ur W, Kdj =njarlkan, E (Kune Na-rayek)= djamard, E (Kune Na-kerlk)= djedberdeh, Rembarrnga= djedberdeh.\
\\dt 09/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djomdji\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Petraeomyrtus.punicea\
\\re fi:Petraeomyrtus_punicea\
\\de Tall spreading highly fire-sensitive myrtaceous shrub of sandstone habitats growing to a height of 2.5 metres with a spread of some 3 metres. Small leaves, about 1.5 mm long, are spirally arranged around the stems and terminal red flowers are seen during early to late fv:yekke season.\
\\xv An-djomdji an-dukkudukkurrh, yiman ka-yime an-djumbak, yiman an-yiwerr, an-kudji an-kudji ka-rri.\
\\xe fi:Petraeomyrtus_punicea is a short shrub, similar to fi:Calytrix_brownii or another Calytrix, and it is not very common.\
\\sc Petraeomyrtus punicea\
\\sd plant\
\\p Petraeomyrtus.punicea_andjomdji.3.jpg\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djomolon\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge arrowroot\
\\re fi:Tacca_leontopetaloides\
\\re arrowroot\
\\sd plant\
\\de tuberous, perennial, herb, 0.2\'961(\'961.5) m high, which grows from a perennial tuber; also known as polynesian arrowroot\
\\sc Tacca leontopetaloides\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djomono\
\\ps n.\
\\de path, road\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =man-bolh.\
\\xv Karri-djomo-kadjung\
\\xe Let's follow the path.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djone\
\\pr an-\
\\va an-djoni\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Terminalia.pterocarya\
\\re Terminalia pterocarya\
\\re wing-seeded terminalia\
\\de wing-seeded terminalia, a small tree (3-7m) with broad leaves, scented cream-coloured flower spikes and broad winged seeds\
\\sc Terminalia pterocarya\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur\
\\ee wood is good for making spear throwers\
\\ur\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djoned\
\\ps n.\
\\ge march.fly\
\\re march fly\
\\de march fly\
\\sc (family) Tabanidae\
\
\\lx djonek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge axe.type\
\\re axe, small hafted blade\
\\de Small axe type with a hafted stone blade.\
\\xv Djonek kabarri-dong, korroko barri-dongi dabborrabbolk ka-rohrok yiman ka-yime dadken.\
\\xe People use fv:djonek to chop into things. The old people used them and it's a kind of stone axe.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 08/Apr/2009\
\
\\lx djong\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge smouldering.log\
\\re smouldering log\
\\de smouldering or burning log after a bushfire has passed\
\\dt 27/Jul/2010\
\
\\lx djongbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de put on clothes\
\\ng usually only used as reflexive\
\\xv Yi-djongburren djalawarra!\
\\xe Put on those trousers.\
\\xv Djorrkkun dedj-mudno birri-djongburrinj.\
\\xe They put on rock ringtail-possum skins.\
\
\\lx Djongkorl Karri\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014 \
\
\\lx djongmiken\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de mother's mother's brother of a third person, eg. when referring to someones MMB one says\
fv:na-djongmiken 'his/her mother's mother's brother'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djongmiken\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de mother's mother of a third person, eg. when referring to someones MM one says fv:ngal-djongmiken\
'his/her mother's mother'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djongok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de 'cousin' (Aboriginal kin system), MMBD, MMBSSD.\
\
\\lx djongokngarre\
\\pr nga-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term. Eg. My 'cousin' (ie. MMBD), your wife, you are my son.\
\\cn ngal-bingok.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Djordbolongkidj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mythological male figure with very long penis.\
\\xv Birri-bimbom ku-wardde man-berd birri-bimbom Djordbolongkidj really berd-kuyeng.\
\\xe They used to paint his penis on the rock, Djordbolongkidj has a very long penis.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djordi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan associated with Kundedjnjenghmi dialect of Bininj Kunwok on the eastern Arnhem Land plateau.\
\\xv Kumawudjbu manu ngalengman konda bedberre Djordi dja manu kure ngayi karrkad mayh ka-yidjadjamdi kumekke ka-djangdi. \
\\xe Kumawudjbu, that is here belonging to the Djordi clan but [the dreaming for a particular animal we are talking about] in my country there is a ceremony place for that dreaming and the sacred site is located there.\
\\xv Ka-bolkyirriyo mane na-Madjdjalum ngadberre na-Djordi. Laik manekke warddeno ngarri-djalyikadjurren nawu Djordi, na-Madjdjalum na-Wurrbbarn, ka-djalyirriyo ngadberre.\
\\xe These places are lying next to each other, Madjdjalum, Djordi all together for us. Like this rock country here we all share it, the Djordi, Madjdjalum and Wurrbbarn clans, we are all located next to each other.\
\\ee The Djordi and Djorrorlam clans have a close company land tenure relationship.\
\\so Jimmy Kalarriya\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djordme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de grow\
\\xv Djordohdjordminj nawu ngarri-dudji.\
\\xe The ones we planted have all grown up.\
\
\\lx djordmerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de collective or plural sense of grow; 'they are all growing'.\
\\xv Nakka barri-wurdurd bolkkime. Barri-djaldjordminj barri-djordmerrinj, bad marrek\
kabarri-bengkan djang kayakki kabarri-wakwan.\
\\xe They are still young today. They have just grown, they have all grown up but they don't have any\
knowledge about dreaming/sacred sites, they don't know them.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djordmiwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de grow something, cultivate\
\\sn 2\
\\de raise someone from a child, 'grow im up'\
\\xv Kornkumo doweng wanjh ngadjadj nuye bi-djordmiweng.\
\\xe His father died and so then his mother's brother raised him.\
\
\\lx djordmo\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Grewia.retusifolia\
\\re fi:Grewia_retusifolia\
\\ps n.\
\\de Small (up to 1.5m) shrub with red-brown edible fruit available May to August. Also known as 'emu berry' or 'dog's balls'.\
\\sc Grewia retusifolia (|fs\{some speakers also\} Grewia multiflora fs:and Helicteres sp.)\
\\uv W, I, E= man-djodmo, Kdj, Djnj= an-djodmo\
\\sn 2\
\\re fi:Hibbertia_lepidota\
\\de A shrub said to be a 'kind of fv:an-djodmo, or similar.\
\\sc Hibbertia lepidota\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj= an-djordmo, I= man-djordmo\
\\ur W= man-djordmong\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djorlam-kadjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de walk behind an obstacle when stalking game, walk towards the prey with the obstacle in between the\
hunter and the prey.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djorlammang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de find a place to hide behind when stalking game\
\
\\lx djorlamno\
\\ps n.\
\\de an obstacle to hide behind when stalking prey eg. a tree, branches, a rock, a vehicle.\
\
\\lx djorlkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de female kangaroo carrying a joey in its pouch\
\\xv Wanjkeno, ka-djorlkan yi-nan ngal-yaw ka-bebme kabani-djarrkworhnan bu laik\
ka-ngimen kilkken ka-kodjngimen ya.\
\\xe (In) the pouch, it carries a joey, you can see the joey coming out and both the mother and joey looking\
around and when the joey goes back down into the pouch, it's head goes inside, yeah.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djorlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go without detour, 'straight up long way'\
\\xv Djalwam la djorlmeng.\
\\xv Wanjh djorlmeng ngalengman wam kure kerrimey.\
\\xe She kept going straight up, a long way to get antbed.\
\
\\lx djorlno\
\\ps n.\
\\de (of macropods) joey inside the pouch of its mother\
\\xv Ani djorlno, ka-yawkan nakka.\
\\xe A joey in the pouch, it (the mother kangaroo) is carrying the joey.\
\
\\lx djorlok\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de hole\
\\xv Nga-mokdjorlok.\
\\xe I've got a tropical ulcer.\
\\xv Yalmo yi-kan man-bolhwarre ka-djorlokwern.\
\\xe Drive slowly the road is bad, full of holes.\
\
\\lx Djorlok\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Estate name or fv:kun-ngeykimuk on the upper Mann River.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx djorndong\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de mash,pound or grind a substance, normally in a bunch.\
\\xv Wolewoleh Kodjdjan mawurrumbulk mey, ngarri-madbom, weleng djorndoy.\
\\xe Yesterday Kodjdjan got a fish poison plant, and we waited while she pounded it (with a rock).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djorndjorn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mudskipper\
\\re mudskipper\
\\re Periophthalmus spp. (mudskippers)\
\\de Mudskipper fish.\
\\xv Djorndjorn Manbulu Karri kah-di.\
\\xe There are mudskipper fish at Manbulu Karri (lower Liverpool River).\
\\sc Periophthalmus spp.\
\\uv I, W, Kdj\
\
\\lx Djorndjorn\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Hill to the east of the Gumardir River in the Maburrinj estate. Djorndjorn lies about 2.5km south-southeast (upstream) of the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djornno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de the pulverised mash of vegetable food which must be ground as part of its preparation\
\\xv Arridong djornno arrimarnbun.\
\\xe We pound it and turn it into a mashed substance.\
\
\\lx djorrbok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge boobook\
\\re southern boobook owl\
\\re fi:Ninox_novaeseelandiae\
\\de Southern boobook owl.\
\\sc Ninox novaeseelandiae\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 29/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx djorrbowke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cross over (eg. a creek)\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djowkke.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djorrhdjorrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de bump up and down such as when travelling on a bush road in a motor vehicle.\
\\nt check.\
\
\\lx djorrhmang\
\\va djorrmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de grab someone, physically catch someone.\
\\xv Djamun bi-djorrhmayinj la lobmeng bi-ngudj-bawong.\
\\xe The policeman tried to grab him but he ran away and left him behind.\
\
\\lx djorrhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de shake OBJ vigorously\
\\xv Yi-dulk-djorrhmen namekke malaworrno.\
\\xe Shake the leaves of the branch.\
\\sy worrdjorrhme\
\
\\lx djorrhno\
\\va kun-djorrh\
\\ng incorporable as fv:-djorrh-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 1\
\\de body shape\
\\ge body\
\\xv Djorrhno minj ka-di.\
\\xe He didn't have (the same) body (as he does today).\
\\xv Kurlbburru djorrh-dolkang\
\\xe This is a place name meaning: 'the head of the axe flew off'\
\\xv Wanjh bo-yi-wam, bongohbonguneng la nungka kam-bid-worrwam, djikirrh!,\
bi-karrmeng, bi-djorrh-dukkang.\
\\xe Then he went to get water and was drinking when he (a nasty killer mimih) threw his hands onto\
him,'snatch!', he grabbed him and held him tightly around his body.\
\\sn 2\
\\de trunk, waist\
\\xv Bi-karrmeng bi-djorrh-dukkang kondah.\
\\xe He grabbed him and held him around the trunk, here.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx djorrhyirdebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de axe head flies off\
\\xv Ka-djorrhyirdebme marneburribawon ngun-bardkarlangderhme.\
\\xe The head of the axe flies off, I jump out of its path and it chops into your knee cap (words to a\
fv:wurrurrumi style song about two spirits chopping with a stone axe for honey in a log. The axe head\
flies off and chops his brother's leg off).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx an-dorrkbakbak\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Tabernaemontana_orientalis\
\\de A small spreading shrub, 1-3m high, with milky sap and a white flower approximately 2cm in diameter with five or so tubular petals. Found along streams in vine thickets and rainforest patches near water. The name fv:an-dorrkbakbak is also used to refer to fi:Hoya_australis because of similarities between the two plants, especially that they both have milky white sap.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sc Tabernaemontana orientalis\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 06/Mar/2016\
\
\\lx djorrkkun\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de rock ringtail possum\
\\sc Petropseudes dahli\
\\pdn kk = dolhwarr\
\
\\lx djorrkkun ka-kodjdokodjdorren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de blood-like urine stains on rock from rock ringtail-possums. Literally 'the rock ringtail-possums bashes his own head'\
\\cf kodjdong 'strike head' as in mortuary rituals to produce blood\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Djorrkkun Ngukno Lorrhmeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate\
\\lit "Water splashed around inside the rock ringtail-possums's guts"\
\
\\lx djorrkkundedjmildungh\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge waxplant\
\\re waxplant\
\\re fi:Hoya_australis\
\\de waxplant, kind of scrambling creeper with fleshy leaves and clusters of small white flowers, growing in the sandstone country\
\\sc Hoya australis\
\\ee fv:Na-djinem kah-ngun warridj., 'The Black Rock Kangaroo eats it fi:[Hoya] also.' (Mick Kubarkku)\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= djorrkkundedjmilrdukno, Djnj= an-dildil\
\\sy an-dorrkbakbak\
\\sn 2\
\\ge ficus.sp.\
\\re Ficus_brachypoda\
\\re rock fig tree\
\\de rock fig\
\\sc Ficus brachypoda\
\\ee There are 2 (or 3, see entry for fv:djorrkundedjmilrduk) different plants with this same name. One fi:(Ficus_brachypoda) is said to be food for fv:mimih spirits and people, the other fi:(Hoya_australis) is food for fv:djorrkkun the rock ringtail-possums and fv:barrk/nadjinem the black wallaroo. The common name for the fi:Hoya_australis (waxplant) is derived from the waxy bundles of white or pale pink flowers that it carries.\
\\uv I\
\\ur E, Djnj= djorrkkundedjmilrdukno\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 22/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx djorrkkundedjmilrduk\
\\va djorrkkundedjmilrdukno\
\\mr djorrkkun 'rock ringtail-possums' + dedj 'arse/bum' + milrduk 'fv:mil?- semen' [+ -no '3sg possessor suffix']\
\\sn 1\
\\ge waxplant\
\\re waxplant\
\\re fi:Hoya_australis\
\\de waxplant, kind of fleshy scrambling creeper with clusters of small white flowers which grows in the sandstone country\
\\sc Hoya australis\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= djorrkkundedjmilrdungh, Djnj= an-dildil\
\\sn 2\
\\ge ficus.sp.\
\\re fi:Ficus_brachypoda\
\\re rock fig tree\
\\de rock fig\
\\sc Ficus brachypoda\
\\ee There are two different plants with this same name. One fi:(Ficus_brachypoda) is said to be food for fv:mimih spirits and people, the other fi:(Hoya_australis) is food for fv:djorrkkun the rock ringtail-possums and fv:barrk/nadjinem the black wallaroo. The common name for the fi:Hoya_australis (waxplant) is derived from the waxy bundles of white or pale pink flowers that it carries.\
\\ee fv:Na-djinem kah-ngun warridj. 'The Black Rock Kangaroo eats it fi:[Hoya] also.' (Mick Kubarkku)\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= djorrkkundedjmildungh\
\\sn 3\
\\ge chain.fruit.vine\
\\re chain fruit vine \
\\re fi:Alyxia_obtusifolia fi:(=Alyxia_spicata)\
\\re fi:Alyxia_spicata fi:(=Alyxia_obtusifolia)\
\\de chain fruit vine, a kind of woody climber or scrambling shrub 1-5m high which grows in monsoon vine forests and sandstone rock\
habitats\
\\sc Alyxia obtusifolia (= Alyxia spicata)\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx djorrkoybun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de urinate\
\\uv E Na-kerlk, some I, (particularly Kundedjwarre lect).\
\\sy dilebun\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx djorrmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de go to someone to pass on something eg. a message, some food.\
\\xv Ngarr-djorrma wardi ka-re.\
\\xe Let's go and see him otherwise he'll leave.\
\\xv Werrk yi-djorrma ba kun-wok yi-benwon.\
\\xe Quick you tell them so you'll give tham a message.\
\\sn 2\
\\de To be bigger in stature or older in seniority than someone else.\
\\xv Ngayi djorrmang.\
\\xe I'm bigger (more grown up) than you.\
\\xv Ngarr-djorrmarrinj.\
\\xe You and I are the same size/age (we grew up together).\
\\xv Ngan-djorrmang.\
\\xe She's bigger/older than me.\
\
\\lx djorrngmerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\sn 1\
\\de spread legs and head down, usually to drink, of animals.\
\\sn 2\
\\de stretch arms up in the air in tiredness\
\
\\lx djorrordme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de limp when walking\
\
\\lx djorrordmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de walk along limping\
\
\\lx Djorrorlam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan on the Arnhem Land plateau (upper Mann River region). Major totem is fv:narlangak 'frilled-neck lizard'.\
\\xv Ngandi-bukkang bu dolobbo Ngabbard nganbukkang en kakkak nga-yahwurdni dja yakminj nawu na-wernwarre en\
birri-Djorrorlam and na-Mowalangu Bangardi.\
\\xe They all showed me how to paint on bark, my father and my mother's mother's brothers, one of whom died when I was small. And also\
my Djorrorlam clan relatives and a Bangardi subsection man of the Mowalangu clan [whom I call mother's mother's brother also].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djowkkayhwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de take something across to the other side\
\
\\lx djowkke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cross over (a creek, river etc)\
\\xv La kondah birrih-ni marrek birri-djowkkemeninj birri-bimbuyi la kun-ronj bo-rayi.\
\\xe But here they didn't cross the river to paint because the water was flowing.\
\\pdn kk = djorrbowke\
\
\\lx djowleng\
\\pr man-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de ripe, cooked\
\
\\lx djowok\
\\va djawok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge koel\
\\re koel\
\\re common koel\
\\re fi:Eudynamys_scolopacea\
\\de Common koel.\
\\sc Eudynamys scolopacea\
\\sy mandjabbirlhbirl\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx djoyikno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de lungs\
\\sy kun-wobe\
\
\\lx djubdjubken\
\\ng see fv:ngal-djubdjubken.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djud\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kundjurd\
\\ge nape\
\\re nape\
\\de Nape (back of neck).\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 28/Oct/2012\
\
\\lx djudbakke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge break.neck\
\\re break neck\
\\de Break neck (of game, after capture).\
\\xv Ngarduk kokok ngayi ngadurndeng ngamang kaluk ba kabun kadjudbakke kure kuronj nungka yimeng djahwodjahwong.\
\\xe  I'll go back and get my big brother so he'll go and kill it and break its neck (the crocodile) somewhere there in the water.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge control.ceremony\
\\re control a ceremony\
\\de Be an expert in ceremony or law, lead or control a ceremony.\
\\xv Korroko nakka nakka kabi-djudbakke ngadberre Ubarr ngayih dorrengh.\
\\xe Already him, he is leading our Ubarr ceremony, me included.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge commit.adultery\
\\re commit adultery (idiom)\
\\re adultery\
\\de An idiom meaning (wife) deceive (husband), play up behind back of (husband). \
\\xv Albininjkobeng kundjudbakbakke (Kdj).\
\\xe Your wife's playing up on you.\
\\dt 28/Oct/2012\
\
\\lx djudbulk\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bloodwood.sp.\
\\re stringybarked bloodwood\
\\re Eucalyptus jacobsiana\
\\de stringybarked bloodwood\
\\xv An-djudbulk an-kung ka-rrahkendong, yiman an-balanjdjarr ka-kukyime an-kurlahrayek, ku-wardde, ku-berrk\
ka-rrangen.\
\\xe fi:Eucalyptus_jacobsiana is a tree [the flowers of which] bees make honey from, similar to fi:Eucalyptus_miniata but the bark is\
stronger and it grows in rock country and in open forest.\
\\sc Eucalyptus jacobsiana\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djudkornkorn\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge nape\
\\re nape\
\\de Nape (of neck).\
\\uv W\
\\sy kundjud\
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx djuddjud\
\\ps n.\
\\ge osprey\
\\re osprey\
\\re fi:Pandion_haliaetus\
\\de Osprey.\
\\sc Pandion haliaetus\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djuddjud\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fibre.skirt\
\\re fibre skirt\
\\re skirt made from kurrajong bark\
\\de fibre skirt made from kurrajong bark.\
\\xv Djurddjurd nawu korroko birri-djongburrimeninj.\
\\xe A long time ago people used to wear fibre skirts.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djudme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge prod\
\\re prod\
\\re jab\
\\re poke\
\\de prod, jab, poke, spike\
\\ng the noun being spiked is incorporated as a verbal prefix\
\\xv Ngan-dengedjurrudjudmeng.\
\\xe It poked my feet all over [walking on spiky vegetation].\
\\xv Yun yi-kanemdjudmerren!\
\\xe Don't poke things into your ear!\
\\dt 22/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx djudju\
\\ps n.\
\\de toothache\
\\xv Djudju ngan-marne-ngalkeng.\
\\xe I've got a toothache.\
\
\\lx djudjulng\
\\pr +PREF\
\\ps n.\
\\de many small things\
\\xv Namarnkorl na-yawkimuk la nakka namindjibuk na-djuhdjulng. Na-djuhdjulng nawu namindjibuk kah-ngey-yo.\
\\xe 'Namarnkorl' is a larger juvenile (of barramundi) and 'namindjibuk' are the very small fish. These very small ones are called 'namindjibuk'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djuhbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de scare, frighten\
\
\\lx djuhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de immerse in water, splash\
\\xv Bi-mim-djuhkeng.\
\\xe She washed his eyes.\
\
\\lx djuhkendi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sitting in water\
\\sy djuhmikendi\
\
\\lx djuhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be in water\
\
\\lx djuhmikendi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sitting in water\
\\sy djuhkendi\
\
\\lx djukerre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de female black wallaroo\
\\sc Macropus bernadus\
\\pdn kk = ngalwarddedjenngorrmo\
\\uv I, W, E, Djnj, Kdj\
\\ee REM =barrk, murrbburnkurla\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx djukka\
\\ps n.\
\\de sugar\
\\bw from English\
\\pdn kk = kun-karnalanj\
\\nt check retroflection in kk\
\
\\lx djule\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de tobacco\
\\pde bakki\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djulidjuli\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re Acacia sp.\
\\de kind of acacia tree from sandstone habitats (presently awaiting taxonomic description and referred to as 'Acacia 24')\
\\sc Acacia sp. (Acacia 24)\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\p Acacia_24.andjulidjuli.1.jpg, Acacia_24.andjulidjuli.2.jpg\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djulng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de bones of ancestors located in old rock ledges in the escarpment country.\
\\xv Djulng dabborrabbolk birri-kurrmeng birri-kudjihmeng.\
\\xe The ancestors put the bones there to rest forever.\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv djulng\
\\le dust\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djulng\
\\lc kun-djulng\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de dust\
\\xv Ngarrben-djulngmang.\
\\xe We're getting their dust (travelling behind them on a dirt road).\
\\xv Ka-djulngdjabdi.\
\\xe The dust is rising up.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djurlukkurn\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Antidesma.ghaesembila\
\\re fi:Antidesma_ghaesembila\
\\re purple currant bush\
\\de Purple currant bush. \
\\sc Antidesma ghaesembila\
\\ee Small tree or shrub (2-10m) with a delicious dark purple currant eaten during wet season and also used as a purple dye for weaving. Two popular sites for gathering these fruits in late wet season are Bilinjdje on the Tomkinson RIver flood plain and Kakunidjdji near Marrkolidjban. The nickname fv:kunjkurlba 'kangaroo blood' is used for this plant as the juice of the currants is used in a type of sorcery used to hunt macropods. The tracks of macropods are sprayed with this juice and it is believed that eventually the legs of the animals will sieze making it easy for hunters to spear them.\
\\pdn kk = minjuk\
\\uv I \
\\ur Kdj =an-djurrukumarlba, W =man-djurrukkumarlba, E= djurlukkurn\
\\ng see also fv:kunjkurlba\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djulukkurnmarlbam\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\va an-djulukkumarlba\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Antidesma.ghaesembilla\
\\re Antidesma_ghaesembilla\
\\de purple currant tree, kind of shrub or small tree (usually 2-3 m) which has edible dark purple berries\
\\sc Antidesma ghaesembilla\
\\sy (m)an-djurlukkun\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-djulukkurn, W =man-djurrukkumarlba,  Kdj= an-djurrukumarlba\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Djurlka\uc0\u8232 \\va Djurlkabulk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Large waterfall and plunge pool on the escarpment edge around 8km due east of Mamardawerre outstation. Djurlka is also the fv:kunngeybadjan \'91big name\'92 for the estate in which the waterfall is located. There is a myth associated with this site about two fv:yawkyawk \'91young women\'92 who travel to Djurlka via Kurrudjmuk and other sites to the west. These women are now represented by two boulders at the base of the falls. However, the main story associated with Djurlka today is that of the ancestral figure Nabarlakadj who was struck by a falling boulder and placed into the site as Dreaming. There is a circular geological formation in the rock on the western side of the plunge pool which represents Nabarlakadj. The site is a popular camping and fishing place for Bininj today. A former fishing taboo seems to no longer apply, however visitors are still respectful of the spiritual nature of the site and new visitors to Djurlka are often baptised with its water whilst calls are made to fv:dabbarrabbolk \'91old people\'92 to introduce the new people to the site.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djum\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sister\
\\re sister\
\\de Sister (older or younger), term of both reference and address.	\
\\uv I, E\
\\sy yabok\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djum\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de baler shell or other large salt water shell\
\
\\lx djumara\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re Acacia sp. (unidentified)\
\\de kind of Eucalyptus, presently unidentified\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djumbak\
\\pr an-, man-, \'f8-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Calytrix.brownii\
\\re fi:Calytrix_brownii\
\\de small woody white-flowering Calytrix shrub\
\\xv Kukku kumekke ka-rrangni ka-rradjme. Bad an-yiwerr, an-djumbak, an-wurrben, an-ngale, an-dadjek an-mardba, djangno. Kanjdji kah-yo bu kah-djuhkendi, wurrkeng. An-mardba an-barlanjdjarr njalenjale. Na-yuhyungki nawu nungan ba-ngehngeybuni bu bah-djangweyi.\
\\xe Where the spring is located, that's where that region ends. But fv:an-yiwerr [unidentified Calytrix], stone country calytrix [fi:Calytrix_achaeta and fi:brownii ], |fi\{Lophostemon lactifluus, Grevillea pteridifolia, Eucalyptus phoenicea\}, all djang [sites ofsignificance].They are all underneath the water in the cool dry season they . The |fi\{Eucalyptus phoenicea, Eucalyptus miniata and all those. \
\\sc Calytrix brownii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Calytrix.achaeta\
\\re fi:Calytrix_achaeta\
\\de Another kind of small sandstone habitat calytrix either easily confused with fi:Calytrix_brownii or together with it is collapsed into a\
super class.\
\\sc Calytrix achaeta\
\\xv Man-djumbak kun-rakken.\
\\xe fi:Calytrix_achaeta is good for fire wood.\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djumbak kilehkilel\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Calytrix.sp.\
\\re fi:Calytrix_decusata\
\\de kind of small Calytrix shrub\
\\ee The name means literally 'small fi:Calytrix_brownii', but scientific taxonomy in fact identifies this plant as another species of Calytrix.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Calytrix decusata\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djumbung\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge short\
\\re short\
\\de Short.\
\\xv Kebkuyeng kumoken, ngah-bimbom. Na-kang kondanj Kubumi, Kabarrebarre, kebkuyeng kaluk dolobbo djumbung.\
\\xe I've painted the freshwater crocodile with its long snout. It lives here at Kubumi and Kabrrebarre and has a long snout but the bark I've painted it on is too short.\
\\cf dedjdjumbung\
\\ce short (of people/animals), opposite of fv:konamkuyeng\
\
\\lx djumdoy\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de Call someone matrilineal grandkin, i.e. the kin term fv:kakkak, ie. mother's mother and mother's mother's siblings and recipricol.\
\\xv Ngandi-djumdoy.\
\\xe They call me fv:kakkak (mother's mother/mother's mother's siblings or a woman's daughter's\
children or a man or woman's sister's daughter's children).\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djumdoy\
\\pr na-\
\\pr al-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge matrilineal.grandkin\
\\re matrilineal grandkin\
\\de Referential term for a person's matrilineal grandkin e.g. a person's 'MM, MMB, MMZ' and reciprocal 'woman's daughter's child, man's sister's daughter's child or woman's sister's daughter's child.\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djumdjum\
\\va more frequently fv:dumdum\
\\ps n.\
\\ge beetles\
\\re beetles\
\\de various kinds of scarab beetles and darkling beetles\
\\uv E= manwurrkeng\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djumu\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term. Eg., 1.My grandson, your younger brother, you are my daughter's son. 2.my\
father, your younger brother, you are my brother's son.\
\\cn na-kurndje.\
\\sn 2\
\\de My uncle, your brother, you are my uncle.\
\\cn ke ngadjadj.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djumuwarre\
\\pr na-/al-\
\\ps n.\
\\de tri-relational kin term. 1. my fv:kanjok 'brother-in-law', your brother, you are my spouse.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djumuwurd\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg., 1.My mother's mother's brother ie. fv:kakkak, your brother, I am your\
daughter's son ie. we call each other fv:kakkak.\
\\cn na-kurndjewurd.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Djunkaronhmi\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx djungdjungh\
\\ps n\
\\ge dog\
\\re dog (gun-gurrng register)\
\\de Dog.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde duruk\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djungkay\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de Ritual manager, person in opposite moiety to moiety affiliation of ceremony and also person whose mother is a traditional owner of an estate of land.\
\\ee E.g. If a ceremony affiliated with the fv:duwa moiety is staged, fv:yirridjdja moiety people are fv:djungkay and vice versa. The fv:djungkay are considered managers in control of the ceremony. The use of the term is completely public and it is not restricted to ceremonial contexts.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djungkurrk\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Gardenia.sp.\
\\re Gardenia species\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of gardenia tree\
\\xv An-djungkurrk arri-darme ka-manjmakmen kun-kanj.\
\\xe We use fv:andjungkurrk leaves to flavour meat and make it taste good.\
\\sc Gardenia fucata\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Djungkurrknja\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Open creek alluvial area around 7km southwest of the East Alligator River. Djungkurrknja is in the upper East Alligator region, south of Ankombod and in the vicinity of 43km southeast of Cahill's Crossing. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx djungunj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge matri-totem\
\\re matri-totem\
\\de Matri-totem, 'sign' associated with each matrilineal semimoiety or phratry and passed on through the female line. \
\\ee For example, the fv:kun-djungunj of fv:yarriyarninj semi-moiety is fv:kunak 'fire' and fv:dongkorl (Kdj) 'firestick'.\
\\cf djungunjkudji\
\\ce Co-matritotemite, person sharing the same matri-totem or 'sign'.\
\\xv Karri-djungunjgudji.\
\\xe We have the same matrilineal totem 'sign'.\
\\sy kun-koymud\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx Djurirrk Kared\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in fv:Ngolkwarre estate.\
\
\\lx djurd\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djurdno\
\\ps n.\
\\de back of neck, nape\
\\xv Yi-djurdbakke!\
\\xe Break its neck!\
\\pdn kk = kun-munjud\
\
\\lx djurdbakke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de break the back of the neck to kill, such as after catching a goanna or other small game.\
\\sy djurddurrkme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djurddurrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de snap the neck of small game to kill it.\
\
\\lx djurdu\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge chopped.off\
\\de Shortened, chopped off, amputated.\
\\xv Nane berldjurdu an-kung djang. Berldjurdu nani yi-na walem mane berldadjmeng bokenh.\
\\xe This figure with amputated arms is a honey dreaming totem. You can see [in the painting] she has arms missing, here to the south [is her totemic centre] and both of her arms are cut off.\
\\xv Biddjurdu.\
\\xe Chopped off finger.\
\\xv Daddjurdu.\
\\xe leg amputated/ one legged person.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx djurdudjurdu\
\\va djurrudjurru\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge round\
\\re round in shape\
\\de Round in shape.\
\\xv An-godjdjurrudjurru\
\\xe round tuber\
\\xv An-wardedjuhdjurdu.\
\\xe Round stones.\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djurlbi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de stone tool with very long point used for spears.\
\\xv Djurlbi kun-wardde yiman ka-yime yorndidj yiman lawk la man-konemkuyeng.\
\\xe Djurlbi is a kind of stone blade, like those we call lawk but very long.\
\
\\lx djurle\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de shade, or any large tree or structure that produces shade, also tall dense forest which provides shade.\
\\pdn kk = kun-kurnu\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djurlebun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make a shade shelter/ bough shelter\
\
\\lx Djurleburrk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Area on the upper East Alligator River. Djurleburrk is in the  vicinity of a major confluence where a tributary meets the East Alligator from the southeast, around the latitude of Cooinda.  \
\\xv Bodjimdjimyi kare kaddum kure Djurleburrk, kaddum Namondowaran, koyek that creek... Kunred karrkad tharran.  \
\\xe From Bodjimdjimyi it goes upstream to Djurleburrk, and upstream on a tributary to the east is Namondowaran... which is up on top of the plateau.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx djurlhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de waken someone by touching them\
\\xv Wanjh nungka kam-duh-durndi nang kabirri-yo "nga!" bi-djurlhmeng.\
\\xe Then he came back and saw that they were sleeping. "Hey", he woke him.\
\
\\lx djurlidjurli\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re Acacia sp.\
\\de Kind of wattle tree which grows in regolithic deposits on rocky platforms.\
\\sc Acacia sp.24\
\\ee Presently without a species name, referred to by botanists as fi:'Acacia_sp.24'\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djurlirrmi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de seasonal term referring to mid-build-up typically in November when the temperature and humidity are\
both very high\
\\xv Djurlirrmi ka-yime kurrung burldjdjarn.\
\\xe The season called fv:djurlirrmi is in the middle of the build-up season.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djurlkkinj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de water\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-ronj, kukku\
\\ee incorporable = o.l.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djurlkkinj-bobekke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de boil\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bo-kinje\
\\xv Karridokan karri-djurlkkinj-modme karri-djurlkkinj-bobekke kun-karnalanj.\
\\pde Karri-re karri-bo-mang karri-bo-kinje djukka.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djurlkkinj-modme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fetch water\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bo-mang.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djurlkkinj-warlhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pour out\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bo-we.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djurlkkinj-yakwan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de drink\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bongun\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djurlng-rawon\
\\ps v.\
\\sn 1\
\\de numerous sources of dust combining to make a lot.\
\\sn 2\
\\de combine small amounts of tobacco to make a larger useable amount.\
\\xv Benem-djulng-rawo.\
\\xe They (2) should combine small amounts of tobacco and bring it here.\
\
\\lx djurlu\
\\ps n.\
\\de matches\
\\bw from either Makassarese colo? 'match' or from Malay or Bajau sulu 'torch'.\
\
\\lx Djurluboyh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djurludjurlhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de poke out of a hole, eject from a hole by using a stick.\
\\xv Ngam-re nga-djurludjurlhme ngurri-yakarrburren.\
\\xe I'll come and poke you out of the hollow and you'll fall in a heap (words to fv:wurrurrumi song).\
\\xv Ngan-djurludjurlhmeng nga-mankang.\
\\xe He ejected out of the hole and I fell down.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djurlukkumarlba\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\cf fs:see (m)an-djurlukkunmarlbam\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djurlurl\
\\ps n.\
\\de fog or mist\
\
\\lx Djurn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate, sacred site for fv:djurn the Black Headed Python.\
\
\\lx djurn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de black headed python (belongs to 'ngal-' noun class).\
\\sc Aspidites melanocephalus\
\\ee 'barks like a dog, attracted to bright colours'\
\\pdn kk = ngaldjangarakurlngunj, ngalwirnyi\
\\ee REM =kunungu\
\\en yirridjdja/Yabburdurrwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Djurn Kanjokme\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename in Kubumi estate\
\\de Placename in Kubumi estate. Literally 'black-headed python, it barks'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Djurn Karonhmi\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kubumi estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx djurndum\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de yellow dye tree\
\\sc Pogonolobus reticulatus\
\\ee roots crushed and boiled to dye pandanus fibre used in the manufacture of baskets and dilly bags\
\\sy man-kurrudjumuk (I)\
\\uv I\
\\uv Djnj= ankurrudjumuk\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djuram\
\\ps n\
\\de Group of people coming with violent intent as law enforcers who seek to publicly punish wrongdoers.\
\\xv Birri-djuramhmeng birri-kuniwam. Djuram, kaluk djuram ngarrih-yime la kuni-wam.\
\\xe They came in a group with violent intent (to punish). A law enforcement encounter, we say like when someone comes to harm us.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djuramhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Surround someone with violent intent; come towards someone with the intention of punishing them (by spearing) for breaches of traditional law.\
\\xv Bindi-yameng korroko birri-yameng na-Wakadj, djuramhmeng kumekke birri-djandjanmeng.\
\\xe One group speared the other and they speared na-Wakadj surrounding him and they threw a volley of\
spears.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djurk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge azure.kingfisher\
\\re azure kingfisher\
\\re fi:Alcedo_azurea\
\\de azure kingfisher\
\\sc Alcedo azurea\
\\uv E\
\\uv Djnj= djuk, I=djirrihdiddid\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 08/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djurr\
\\pr kun-\
\\va djurrno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge blade\
\\re blade\
\\de Blade, stone blade, sharp edge.\
\\xv An-mayikmud djurrno ka-karrme kan-dadje. Kunj nganabbarru marrek ka-ngun an-djurrbang.\
\\xe The fv:anmayikmud grass has a sharp blade that can cut you. Kangaroos and buffaloes don\'92t eat it because of the dangerous sharp edge.\
\\uv I, E, Djnj= djurrno, W, Kdj= kun-djurr\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx djurra\
\\ps n.\
\\de paper, book, document etc.\
\\bw from Macassan, sura? 'letter'.\
\
\\lx Djurray\
\\ps proper n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on a tributary of the headwaters of the Katherine River with significant contact rock art (boats).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 10/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx djurrbbi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Banteng cattle\
\\so JD\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx djurrbuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de stone hammer or pounder used to grind and pound food\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx djurrh\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\de current, running water\
\\xv Kadjurrhbume.\
\\xe Waterfall.\
\\xv Kamdjurrhre.\
\\xe Flood water is coming up.\
\\uv I, Kdj, Djnj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djurrhbume\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de waterfall\
\\xv Karri-re Kunburray bolk-bukkan ka-djurrhbume kumekke.\
\\xe We'll go to fv:Kunburray and I'll show you the waterfall there.\
\
\\lx djurrih\
\\ps n.\
\\ge varied.lorikeet\
\\re varied lorikeet\
\\re fi:Psitteuteles_versicolor\
\\de Varied lorikeet.\
\\sc Psitteuteles versicolor\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx Djurrih Kawokbebme\
\\ps place n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Valley and gorge in the Maburrinj estate. As the Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer) flows off the escarpment into open forest southeast of its confluence with the Goomadeer, it is met by a creek flowing off the escarpment from the south. This valley and gorge area are known as Djurrih Kawokbebme. This is on the border of the Maburrinj estate. South and southwest of here (upstream) is the Djalbangurrk estate. \
\\sn 2\
\\re place name in Ankung Djang estate\
\\de Large waterfall on a feeder tributary of the upper Liverpool River in the Ankung Djang estate. The place name literally means \'91the voice of the varied lorikeet comes out\'92.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx djurriyiddjurri\
\\pr an-\
\\va an-madjdjurriyiddjurri\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mangrove.sp.\
\\re white mangrove\
\\re fi:Avicennia_marina (mangrove sp.)\
\\sd plant\
\\de white mangrove\
\\xv Mangkuwil kah-di an-djurriyiddjurri an-me ka-karrmehkarrme dja marrek karri-ngun.\
\\xe The white mangrove grows near the sea and has fruits but we don't eat them.\
\\sc Avicennia marina\
\\uv Djnj?\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djurrkdjurrk\
\\ps adj.\
\\re larrikin, bawdy jokester \
\\re Bawdy jokester.\
\\de Bawdy jokester, libidinous.\
\\xv Yi-djurrkdjurrk ngudda!\
\\xe You are a sexy fellow aren't you!\
\\uv I\
\\dt 21/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djurrkdjurrkno\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge fast.tempo\
\\re fast rhythmic mode\
\\de fast rhythmic mode (music)\
\\sd music\
\\sy (m)an-djarradjarrak, (m)an-wob\
\\uv W, Djnj, E\
\\ur I= man-djarradjarrak\
\\dt 21/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djurrkdjurrkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge do.speedily\
\\re do quickly, hastily\
\\de Do an action quickly, with haste, quick 'slap up' e.g. poor quality artwork.\
\\xv Mahni yi-djurrkdjurrkmeng.\
\\xe You've just made this too quickly [without care].\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\cf2 \\lx djurrkkan \
\\ps v.t.\
\\re tempt\
\\de Pressure someone, tempt someone.\
\\xv Ngaye ngakeleminj, ngaye ngamarneyimeng Yirrawala, 'Ngudda kanhdjurrkkani bu ngayameng.\'92 Ngaye ngayidduy.\
\\xe I was scared. I told Yirrawala \'91You were pressuring me to spear him\'92. I was angry. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 198\
\\id DK\
\\dt 31/Jul/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx djurrkurl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de generic for most finches e.g. long tailed finch, masked finch and others.\
\\sc Peophila ssp.\
\\ee Some finch species have distinct Kuninjku names such as fv:nin but most are called the generic name\
fv:djurrkurl.\
\\uv Kune =djurrkurl, nin\
\\ee REM =nin\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx djurrkwon\
\\sn 1\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de get excited, be enthusiastic\
\\xv Yawurrinj, yun yalmo ngurri-borrkke, ngurri-djurrkwo, ngurri-wernhmelmen!\
\\xe You young men, don't dance quietly, but really get into it and stomp hard!\
\\xv Birri-marrwe doweng rowk, wanjh birri-nang man-me kam-bebmeng, birri-djurrkwong.\
\\xe Everybody was hungry and then they saw the food (tucker truck) arrive and they were all excited.\
\\sn 2\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge enthuseOBJ\
\\re enthuse or encourage someone\
\\de Enthuse someone, encourage to act.\
\\xv Ma ngarrben-djurrkwon yawurrinj.\
\\xe Come on, let's go and stir those guys up, get them going.\
\\cf djurrkworren\
\\ce enthuse or encourage each other, get each other excited\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djurrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de flow (of water)\
\\dv ka-bo-bidme\
\
\\lx Djurrubu\
\\va Durrubu\
\\ps place n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region\
\\de Gorge area at 'Magela Falls', where Magela Creek (Warnbi Creek) flows off the plateau around 30km southeast of Jabiru. From here the Magela flows down to Korokoro and Ngalalaman ('Bowerbird Station' area). Djurrubu Kadjang, the Water Goanna Dreaming site, is upstream from the falls on the plateau. There is a stone ring arrangement around a kilometre northeast of the falls where the male euro (kalkberd) from Nawarray placed itself as a Dreaming. This is a Yirridjdja moiety area, not to be confused with the Duwa moiety area of the same name around 25km to the east-northeast on the East Alligator River. \
\\xv Marrek ngabengkayi, nomo ngandimarnebolkngeybuyi bad still ngabengkan bu anbarrarn kure Djurrubu.\
\\xe They didn't tell me any (other) place name here but I still know it's called the Djurrubu Gorge.\
\\sn 2\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site which extends along a long, fairly straight stretch of the upper East Alligator River, beginning around 50km southeast (upstream) of Cahill's Crossing. It is a fishing and short necked turtle hunting site with traditional campsites along the sandy banks. This is a Duwa moiety place, not to be confused with the Yirridjdja moiety area of the same name around 25km to the west-southwest on Magela Creek. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Djurrubu Kadjang\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region\
\\de Water Goanna Dreaming site (Varanus mertensi) on Magela Creek. Djurrubu Kadjang is centred on a large body of water on the creek, above 'Magela Falls' on the plateau. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx djurrudjurruhwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make wide, fat and smooth.\
\
\\lx djurrul\
\\ps n.\
\\ge frogmouth\
\\re tawny frogmouth\
\\fi:Podargus_strigoides\
\\de Tawny frogmouth.\
\\sc Podargus strigoides\
\\sy kumuyuk-kumuyuk\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I= kuluyhkuluy, Kdj syn.= aleddjumud\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx djuwe\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Great Bower Bird\
\\sc Chlamydera nuchalis\
\
\\lx djuy\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'keep going'\
\
\\lx djuyh\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Corymbia_bleeseri\
\\re fi:Corymbia_bleeseri\
\\re smooth-stemmed bloodwood \
\\de smooth-stemmed bloodwood \
\\sc Corymbia bleeseri\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-kalarr\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx djuyhno\
\\ps n.\
\\de any powdered substance eg. baking powder, coffee\
\\cf djuyme\
\\ce grind to a powder.\
\
\\lx djuyme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de grind (to produce a flour or pulp) 2. massage\
\\cf djuyno\
\\ce powder\
\
\\lx rdar\
\\lc man-rdar\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de paperbark tree species.\
\\cf see under 'rd'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx rdardda\
\\va rdardah, dardda\
\\ps n.\
\\ge young.brother\
\\re younger brother\
\\de Younger brother of a man, younger sister of a woman; can be used as referential or vocative.\
\\xv Baleh wam rdarddah ngunehrangem?\
\\xe Where's your little brother (parent to child)?\
\\xv Baleh wam ngalu rdarddah ngaldaluk?\
\\xe Where'd your little sister go? (parent to child)\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 24/Nov/2008 \
\
\\lx rdarh\
\\ps n.\
\\de bark of Eucalyptus tetrodonta, used for numerous purposes, especially for bark paintings.\
\\de E\
\\sy dolobbo.\
\\xv Kuni nga-re rdarh nga-lawkmang.\
\\xe I'm going over there to peel off some stringybark.\
\
\\lx rdebi/derbi\
\\lc kun-rdebi/derbi\
\\ps n.\
\\de a special set of extensive triangular kinship terms. Thus if person A is speaking to person B about\
person C, then A will use a special referent term for C determined by B's kin relationship to A and B\
will, in the presence of A use a reciprical referent term for C.\
\\uv I\
\\uv E = kun-derbuy, Dj = kun-dembuy\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rdehme\
\\va rderhme, rderdme, redehme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de chop with an axe\
\\xv Bulanj rderhmeng wanjh borrolkang manekke djidjerok.\
\\xe Bulanj chopped the water tree and the water came pouring out.\
\\ur E= rderdme\
\\pdn kk = kolihme.\
\
\\lx Rderrehkareh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Darnkorlo clan estate and frog dreaming site.\
\
\\lx rduddu, rdudduno\
\\lc kun-rduddu, rdudduno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de heart\
\
\\lx rdurdmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re get a big mob\
\\re be successful in hunting\
\\de Get a big mob of something valuable e.g. game, fish, fruit.\
\\xv Djenj barri-rdurdmey kalerrh, bikku, kanbaldjdja.\
\\xe They got a big mob of fish, long-toms, catfish and eel-tailed catfish.\
\\dt 19/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx rdukdjinjhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de ejaculate (semen).\
\
\\lx rdukno\
\\va kun-rduk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de semen\
\
\\lx rdungkurd-rdungkurdme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Throbbing, pulsating.\
\\xv Nakka wurdyaw njale ka-berdrdungkurdrdungkurdme!\
\\xe Hey look at that boy going around with his throbbing prick.\
\\ee This illustrative sentence is an example of fv:kunmodjarewarre joking language that may feature obscenity between two people who call each other fv:kakkak but such obscenity is not considered offensive but rather a humorous and fun way of ratifying kinship relationships].\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Ildukidj\
\\va Yulukidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of an Iwaidja patriclan in north-west Arnhem Land\
\\ee The Iwaidja name fv:Ildukidj (spelt fv:Ildugij in Iwaidja orthogrphy) is cognate with the Bininj Kunwok name fv:Yulukidj but the latter\
name refers to another territory discontiguous with the Iwaidja clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\\lx ka-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 3rd person singular (3 minimal) non-past tense intransitive pronominal prefix. Note: the past form is\
zero (\'af-).\
\\xv Ka-rri kumekke.\
\\xe There it is over there.\
\\sn 2\
\\de 3rd person singular subject, third person lower animate (non-human) object.\
\\xv Bu kam-durndeng duruk namekke ka-bun.\
\\xe If that dog comes back he'll kill it.\
\\sn 3\
\\de A deverbalised prefix on body parts.\
\\xv Ka-kom ngalyod, djang Nangarlminj.\
\\xe The rainbow serpent's neck sticks out at the sacred site Nangarlminj.\
\\xv Konda ka-bard kondanj ka-nganjboke.\
\\xe The spear grass stands here and is coming into seed here.\
\\uv Djnj = ba-\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kab\
\\ps n.\
\\de cup, pannikin\
\\bw from English 'cup'.\
\
\cf2 \\lx kab\
\\ps propos.\
\\re how about\'85\
\\de An interjection that introduces a proposal, \'91how about\'85\'92.\
\\xv Kab ngarre ngarrnan\
\\xe Let\'92s go and have a look\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 148\
\\id DK\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= wardi\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx Kabadyorrkbun\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place located about 500 west of Yikarrakkal outstation on a bend in the Mann River in the area known as fv:Kabarrebarre. Rock art sites including cupules representing green plum dreaming are located there.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Kabanderre\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kabarlahyo\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place name next to Mokmek, camping place on the same creek as Mokmek. Walking track from here to Kunburray is to go to Nayinin, Nakorlk Kayo and Mibarlwarra.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx Kabarlekidyo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate. Small crab dreaming place.\
\\xv Kabarlekidyo kambuk djangno ka-yo.\
\\xe There is a crab dreaming sacred site at fv:Kabarlekidyo.\
\
\\lx Kabarnderreh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate and fv:Wurrbbarnbulu yikurrumu clan area.\
\\en yirridjdja\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kabarrebarre\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de A major place name or fv:kun-ngey-badjan which consists of a wide arm of the Mann River close to Yikarrakkal Homeland Centre but within fv:na-Kurulk clan estate although the site is under the custody of fv:na-Kulmarru people. In fv:yikurrumu system the place is in fv:Wurrkku clan estate It is a rainbow serpent sacred site or fv:djang but it is quite safe and permissable to swim here. Three places within the fv:Kabarrebarre area include fv:Mikorrkorr, fv:Kundjabe and fv:Kabadyorrkbun.\
\\en duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kabarreburlun\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx kabbal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de plain country, open area\
\\xv Ngad kabbal konda wardde-yak.\
\\xe We are plains people, there is no stone country here.\
\
\\lx kabbala\
\\ps n.\
\\agr man-\
\\de boat, generic for all kinds\
\\cf bilem, wubbunj, baridjbarr\
\\bw from Macassarese k\'b7ppala? 'boat'\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kabbalabibi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de fighting stick weapon with two sharp prongs or points at one end near the handle, similar to miyarrrul\
except miyarrul doesn't have the sharp points.\
\\xv Kabbalabibi ka-karrme wirlmurr.\
\\xe The kabbalabibi fighting stick has sharp points.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kabbalurlu\
\\ps adv\
\\de keep going without stopping or being sidetracked.\
\\xv Kabbalurlu ka-djal-lobme.\
\\xe He's just speeding off without stopping (tot alk to us).\
\
\\lx kabbamarda\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de stone edge ground axe\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dadken\
\\ee Burarra =gapamarda 'stone axe'.\
\\nt check gapanmarda?\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kabbanno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de handle of the stone axe fv:dadken.\
\
\\lx kabbarladj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de clearing, open plain country surrounded by thick vegetation, no or few trees, easy to travel across.\
\\xv Kabbarladj kabirri-di.\
\\xe They are in the clearing.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kabbari\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de This is the name of an estate (the kunngeybadjan or \'91big name\'92) which comprises a complex of sites including many djang where the Goomadeer River flows out of the Arnhem Land plateau south of Mamardawerre and Mandilbareng outstations. Associated site names include Namarnde Kalurlkan, Nadjardenj, Nanjiwk, Kalerrh Kumanem, Kunngulukki, Meleyengkobarnrungi, Wurrbbarn, Kunyikuymi, Yimalannga, Kanjarladjkendi, Kabuludjidjmini, Bomarranj, Yiwoban, Yenemarrbara and Nakorrmohkorrmo. Kabbari is best known for its mythological history which concerns Ngalyod\'92s displeasure with a crying child. \
\\xv Korroko bininj birrini kunred Kabbari / Nawu kunborrk birrikarmi birriborrkkeyi (Wildflower Band, Kabbari (A Place Called Kabbari) 2009)\uc0\u8232 \\xe A long time ago people lived on this land Kabbari / They used to have special ceremonies, singing and dancing in that place (Wildflower Band, Kabbari / A Place Called Kabbari, 2009)\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kabbari Ngalyod\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A feature at the top of the cliff face at Kunyikuymi which represents ngalyod the rainbow serpent who consumed the two orphans of Kabbari.\
\\cf Kunyikuymi\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kabbarriya\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de fish trapping area on Tomkinson River flood plain in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx kabbarrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de white ochre or clay, kaolin\
\\sn 2\
\\de flour\
\\ee fv:Djang or sacred site at fv:kudjarnngal. Delek is the faeces or vomitus of fv:ngalyod the rainbow serpent.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde 1. delek 2. kandiddjawa\
\\xv Karri-dokan kabbarrk karri-modme karri-banjinhmerren.\
\\pde Karri-re delek karri-mang karri-barurren.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kabbay\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ironwood.resin\
\\re ironwood tree resin\
\\de Resin from ironwood tree roots used to haft axeheads to handles and spear points to their shafts (as well as other uses). The roots of the ironwood tree fi:Erythrphloeum chlorostachys are dug up and broken off. They are then heated over a fire and the resin or gum will exude. The exudate is collected on a stick or rock until it has been exhausted. The resin is highly toxic and the extraction is conducted away from domestic areas.\
\\sd material culture\
\
\\lx kabbungurr\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge sleepy.cod\
\\re sleepy cod\
\\re fi:Oxyeleotris_lineolata\
\\de sleepy cod\
\\sc Oxyeleotris lineolata\
\\sn 2\
\\ge flathead.goby\
\\re flathead goby\
\\re fi:Glossogobius_giuris\
\\de Flathead goby.\
\\sc Glossogobius giuris\
\\en fv:duwa moiety totemic site or fv:djang at Midjuyh on Liverpool River.\
\\pdn kk = ngandjakberberh\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= djurludj\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kabbungurr Komdokomdoy\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Creek in a gorge close to Mamardawerre outstation to the south across the Goomadeer River. \
\\xv Kabbungurr Komdokomdongi anbarrarn mankabo darnki Mamardawerre.\
\\xe Kabbungurr Komdokomdongi is a creek in a gorge close to Mamardawerre.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kabburde\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de mound of earth which is considered a sacred site. An example is located near fv:Kunbadkarri on the\
Tomkinson River flood plain in na-Darnkorlo> clan estate.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kabene-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 3rd person dual (3 unit augmented) intransitive pronominal prefix. Note: past form is fv:bene-.\
\\xv kabene-re.\
\\xe They (both) are going.\
\\sn 2\
\\de 3rd person dual subject, 3rd person singular object (3 unit augmented/3 minimal) pronominal prefix.\
\\xv Kabene-bun.\
\\xe They (both) are hitting him.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Non-verbal characteristic prefix.\
\\xv Kabene-keb-rohrok.\
\\xe They both have similar facial features.\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj= kabani-, E= kabini-\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kabenedurhdurni\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A fv:Namarnkorl_Djang (Barramundi Dreaming) site near the Goomadeer River. Kabenedurhdurni refers to a gorge about 4km northwest of Kunyikuymi above the Goomadeer River. The creek coming down to the Goomadeer at Kunyikuymi from the west goes up to Mikurlkurlyi, while the next creek to the north goes up to Kabenedurhdurni. The focus of the fv:djang is a rock around three metres wide and four metres high perched on top of a slope above the creek. Underlyingly this word is Kabene-rdurhdurni, a reduplicated form meaning \'91the two of them kept going back/returning\'92.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kaberrkdi\
\\va kuberrkdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be gathered in numbers, in a group\
\\xv Wanjh birri-wam konda birri-yerrhyerrkarrinj birri-kuberrkdi rowk.\
\\xe Then they all went here and sat themselves down all in a group.\
\\xv Kakaberrkdi andarl kungarre.\
\\xe There's a forest of paperbark trees.\
\\dt 13/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx kaberrkdjirrkkarren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re gather together (a lot of people)\
\\de Meeting together and having discussion with various opinions expressed.\
\\xv Wolewole ngarriwam ngarrikaberrkdjirrkkarrinj ngarriwokdi kunmayali manbihbiyika.\
\\xe Yesterday we went to a meeting and had a discussion talking about a lot of different ideas.\
\\dt 13/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx kaberrkni\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sit in numbers, sit together in a group.\
\
\\lx kaberrk-raworren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de make a group of many\
\\uv W=mirndemonemerrimen\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kaberrkyirriyo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de dry open forest between outcrops or ridges of stone country, escarpment outlier country.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kabirlbbirlbmini\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:na-kurulk clan estate not far from fv:Mumeka.\
\
\\lx kabirlekan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of tree (5-15m) with edible red berries, grows in monsoon vine thickets\
\\sc Aidia racemosa (also known as Aidia cochinchinensis)\
\
\\lx Kabirlhbirlmeni\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place south of Mumeka, visited for wallaby hunting\
\\en duwa, fv:bolk-kurulk\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kabirlingun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djok clan estate not far from rock art shelters.\
\\xv Kabirlingun kure wakkidj ngarri-we.\
\\xe Kabirlingun is where we go fishing.\
\
\\lx kabirrba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\ge scat.fish\
\\de kind of fish namely scats, such as spotted scat and striped scat\
\\sc Scatophagus argus, Selenotoca multifasciata\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kabirri-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 3rd person plural (3 augmented) intransitive pronominal prefix. Note: past form is fv:birri-.\
\\xv Kabirri-re djenj.\
\\xe They're going fishing (3 or more people).\
\\sn 2\
\\de 3rd person plural subject, 3rd person singular object (3 augmented/3 minimal).\
\\xv Karri-kinje.\
\\xe They are burning it.\
\\uv Djnj= kabarri- (optional)\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kabirrinjmala\
\\ps n. place\
\\ge place name\
\\re place in Balngarra clan estate\
\\de place in Bolkdjam estate on a small crossing on the Maningrida road to Bolkdjam outstation.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kabo\
\\ps n.\
\\re green ant\
\\de Green ant.\
\\uv W, I= bodbang\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kabo\
\\pr man-\
\\va kabono\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\sd geographic\
\\de water course, creek\
\\xv Ka-rrolhme kudjewk, ka-wohre. Bolkki ka-yo kure man-kabo. Ngayi minj nga-re , wardi ngan-bun.\
\\xe It comes up in the wet season and walks around. Today it's there in the creek. I don't go there otherwise it will kill me.\
\\xv Bedda Nakorrkko bene-kabokurrmeng.\
\\xe The fv:Nakorrkko ancestors placed the creek there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kabodkarrebun\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de Gorge and camping place in Kunukdi estate on walking route east to Mibarra in Kumarrirnbang estate. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kabohkabo\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\ge riverine.landscape\
\\re riverine landscape\
\\re drainage basin\
\\de See fv:man-kabohmankabo\
\\dt 15/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kabohmankabo\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge riverine.landscape\
\\re riverine landscape\
\\re drainage basin\
\\de Expanse of a watercourse broken up into numerous tributaries and channels, riverine landscape, drainage basin.\
\\uv Djnj= an-kabohankabo\
\\xv An-kung wanjh kumekke [ka-]balhre ka-yakmen darnkih an-boberl an-yende ka-rengere an-kabohankabo.\
\\xe The honey [region] keeps going and finishes close to the many tributaries of the river which branch out into a riverine landscape.\
\\sy (m)an-kabohkabo\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kabokaba\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps n\
\\de rings expanding in the water when you throw something in or when a fish splashes\
\\xv Wolewoleh nga-wam nga-nang kabokaba kure djenj wolohmeng.\
\\xe Yesterday I saw expanding rings in the water where a fish snapped.\
\
\\lx kabono\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de creek or other watercourse\
\\xv Kureh karri-kad, Kumardderr kabono, Mamadawerre ya, la kuni kaddum kun-red djarre ya\
Madjunbardi ya kumekke.\
\\xe It's in the west,(near) the Kumadderr River and Mamadawerre but a long way up in the higher country,\
yes there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kabornayehyenan\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on the upper Mann River\
\\xv Kabornayehyenan an-kodjbang an-kuken dalak ngukno\
\\xe At Kabornayehyenan are very important water peanut plants which represent the shit of the yellow spotted monitor.\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx Kaborrmiyo\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Bolkngok estate. Literally 'he/she sleeps snoring.'\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kabowakbun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\lit the water curves around\
\\de an ox-bow lake on the Liverpool River in fv:Marrirn clan estate which is a magpie goose sacred site.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kaboyarrme\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site with a small creek in a braided stream network in the upper reaches of the Goomadeer River. The location of this site is not certain, and there are about 30 square kilometres of braided streams in this region which feed into the upper Goomadeer River, however it seems to be a little over 20km south (upstream) of the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 and \'91Goomadeer\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River.  \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kabukkawa\
\\ps n.\
\\ge helmeted.friarbird\
\\re fi:Philemon_buceroides\
\\re helmeted friarbird\
\\de helmeted friarbird, also known as the sandstone friarbird\
\\sc fi:Philemon_buceroides\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 7/Nov/2010\
\
\\lx Kabuludjidjmini\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A waterfall about 3 kilometres to the west up the tributary that flows into the Goomadeer at Kabbari (from the west).\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kabulurr\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Site 14 km north-west of Nabarlek and directly south of Djimubarn, between the Gunbalanya-Nabarlek and Gunbalanya-Maningrida roads. The area encompasses a section of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek and the sandstone outlier to its west, separate from the main escarpment. The region includes a number of sandstone outcrops and rock art galleries. One small outcrop in particular is regarded as an old woman of the Ngalwamud subsection who turned into rock here. She came from the west from an Erre speaking area, but at Birrirddak Creek the river came up and she drowned and became a rock, which is a sacred site. \
\\xv Kabulurr man-bokimuk kumekke ku-kuken kumekke. Djenj mawurrk birri-kolhbuni.\
\\xe At Kabulurr there is a big body of water, an important camping place. People used to use fish poison to catch fish there.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kabun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de sit OBJ on lap\
\\sn 2\
\\de sit on eggs.\
\\sy dabukabun\
\
\\lx kabundi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge ceremony.take.place\
\\re take place (of ceremony)\
\\de Ceremony take place, ceremony 'sit' at a site\
\\xv Bornawurlu Mardayin korroko barri-djurledjurlenami djaying [pause] ... na-rrinjhmi, na-Bokmarnde anekke mane ka-bolkyirriyo, Mardayin kumekke ba-kabundi, ka-kabundi korroko barri-borrkkeyi Mardayin kun-djurle kumekke ba-rri.\
\\xe At Bornawulu they used to make shade shelters for the Mardayin ceremony, there where those two clans lie next to each other, Dinjhmi and Bokmarnde, that's where the Mardayin ceremony sat down on the country long ago and they danced in the Mardayin where that shade house was.\
\\dt 03/Nov/2010\
\
\\lx Kaburlukdayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de hill in Born clan estate with rock art.\
\
\\lx Kaburrmiyo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djalama clan estate near Kurrukkurrh outstation, ceremony place.\
\
\\lx kabuy\
\\ps n.\
\\pr kun-\
\\de dirt, soil, earth\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-kurlk\
\\xv Karri-kamukkerren kun-kabuy.\
\\pde Karri-dudjerren kun-kurlk.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kab\'fanekulki\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kadayodayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\uv E, Dedjnjenghmi\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kadbarna\
\\ps n.\
\\de not sure but a large species of saltwater rock fish possibly a cod or stone fish\
\\ee fv:kan-dulubun it spikes us.\
\\nt check\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kadberre\
\\ps ob.pron./poss.pron.\
\\de us (you 3+ and me), ours (3+)\
\
\\lx kaddikaddi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 1\
\\de seagull\
\\sc Larus novaehollandiae\
\\sn 2\
\\de song style name which falls within the fv:kun-borrk genre of Arnhem Land music and is associated\
with the Kunib\'ccdji people of Maningrida.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kaddum\
\\ps n./adv.\
\\sn 1\
\\de up high, at the top, up\
\\sn 2\
\\de sky, heaven\
\\sn 3\
\\de loudly\
\\xv Kaddum yi-wokdi.\
\\xe Talk loudly.\
\\pdn kk = kadwohka\
\\nt there should be two parts of speech under the one entry, one a locative adverb and the other a noun, same for kanjdji/kanjdjikanjdji\
\\dt 21/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Kadedjberme\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place name in Yurlhmanj clan estate downstream from the creek/billabong at Makkalarl\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kadkahbu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kadwohka\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de top, sky, heaven, up, the top of a landscape feature\
\\pde kaddum\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kadjabonja\
\\ps interj.\
\\de a response of humorous embarrassment or after a joke.\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx Kadjamankayhmi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Long scarp about 5km long in the Makorl estate. The scarp face runs west-northwest from near the west bank of the Goomadeer River just near its confluence with the \'91Gumardir\'92 River (the upper eastern branch). The site is a Namarnde \'91malicious spirit being\'92 djang (Dreaming site). The site Namarnde Djikkarrwun lies at the base of this scarp.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 18/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kadjid\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps n. (locative)\
\\de in the sand\
\\uv W\
\\uv I= ku-kawadj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kadjirrarn\
\\va possibly Kadjyirrarn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kadjirrdjirrmekarri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate next to fv:Durukngakmeng.\
\
\\lx kadjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de chase\
\\xv Kam-birli-kadjung birndu.\
\\xe The mosquitoes are attracted to the light.\
\\xv Karri-bolh-kadjung.\
\\xe Let's follow this track.\
\\sn 2\
\\de follow in fashion or custom.\
\\xv Ngarr-ben-yi-kadjung marradjiri-kenh.\
\\xe We follow their custom of the Marradjiri ceremony.\
\\cf kadjurren\
\\ce 1. be of the same group or tribe 2. share\
\\xv Ngarri-kadjurren.\
\\xe We are countrymen.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx kadjung (2)\
\\ps v.i.\
\\va wandakadjung\
\\de sing (ceremonial context only)\
\
\\lx kadjurren\
\\ps n.\
\\de countrymen\
\\xv Ngad ngarri-kadjurren.\
\\xe We are countrymen.\
\
\\lx kadjeddjed\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de echidna\
\\sc Tachyglossus aculeatus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde ngarrbek, bambirl\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kah\
\\ps interj.\
\\de ackowledgement of receipt, said on being given something.\
\
\\lx kah\
\\hm 1\
\\ps prep.\
\\de on, at, to\
\\uv I,E\
\\xv Kah-barndi balabbala kah.\
\\xe She's up on the table.\
\
\\lx kah\
\\hm 2\
\\va ka\
\\ps loc. suff.\
\\ge LOC\
\\re at\
\\re to\
\\re in\
\\de locative suffix, in, to, at\
\\uv E, I \
\\xv bokenh-ka\
\\xe two times, twice\
\\xv konda-kah\
\\xe on this side\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kahbow\
\\ps conj.\
\\ge in.case\
\\re in case\
\\de 'in case'\
\\xv Ngarray kaddum ngarr-marnbun kun-rak ngarr-worhnan kahbow kam-re.\
\\xe Let's go up on higher ground and make a fire so we can watch out for her in case she comes.\
\\dt 16/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kahwi\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'well then', just\
\\xv Nakkan njale yi-karrme. Kahwi yi-we!\
\\xe What are you holding? Just chuck it away.\
\
\\lx kak\
\\ps interjection\
\\de bad, don't touch, 'you can't do that!'\
\\xv Mandi yi-yakwan la na-njeknjek, na-njeknjek mandi yi-yakwan, kayakki kayakki kak, kak,\
kak kayakki.\
\\xe Don't eat it, it's sacred/restricted, don't eat it, no, no, it's not allowed, no, no\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kak\
\\pr ku\
\\ps n.\
\\de (at) night\
\
\\lx kak\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\va kakno, kukakno (Kune dialect)\
\\de night (the period of darkness between sunset and sunrise)\
\\ng incorporable\
\\xv Ngane-kak-birli-kan.\
\\xe We're going (hunting) at night with torches.\
\\cf kakre\
\\ce go by night\
\
\\lx Kakalirri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in the fv:Bakkarda estate near fv:Mankorlod. This is an old ceremony camp for the Yabburdurrwa, down on the creek. Kakalirri is also associated with the Kunabibi ceremony which the fv:Nakorrkko ancestral heroes performed there after deciding to abandon a ceremony further south at Drennokah in the Wurralele estate (upper Cadell River area).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kakarrebulun\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename in Kodwalewale estate\
\\de Placename in Kodwalewale estate\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx kakbakmeng\
\\ps adj.\
\\de really dark, pitch black eg. in a cave\
\
\\lx kakbi\
\\ps loc.\
\\de north\
\
\\lx kakdong\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de rise early before dawn\
\
\\lx Kakilirri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate where fv:Na-korrkko father and son slept.\
\
\\lx kakkak\
\\ps n.\
\\de mother's mother, father's father and reciprocal MM,MMB,ZDD,ZDS,FF and also possibly MMBSD,\
MMBSS.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kakkak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my mother's mother, your mother, you are my uncle.\
\\cn ngal-kakkak.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kakkak\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my mother, your mother's mother, you are my nephew.\
\\cn kakkak.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kakkali\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spouse\
\\re spouse class\
\\re husband/wife\
\\re wife/husband\
\\de term of reference or address for someone in a cross-cousin spouse or spouse's sibling class who is an actual or intended in-law. Kinship classes include certain cross-cousins (FZC, MBC) or second cross cousin (e.g. MMBDD/MFZDS, FFZSD/FMBSS, also a FZDDD/MMMBS)\
\
\\lx kakkalihme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge call.OBJspouse\
\\re call OBJ fv:gakkali\
\\de Call OBJ fv:gakkali '(actual or classificatory) spouse'.\
\\xv Ngalih kabi-kakkalihme.\
\\xe That's the woman he calls 'wife'.\
\\dt 17/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kakkalihmiken\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spouse\
\\re spouse of someone\
\\de Spouse or potential marriage partner of someone; also husband and wife pair, married couple.\
\\xv Bani-kakkalihmiken. (Djnj, Kdj)\
\\xe They are husband and wife.\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 19/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kakkawarr\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial messengers who travel to other country to bring participants to ceremony.\
\\xv Kakkawarr ka-ben-mang birri-wern bininj.\
\\xe The messenger will bring many people.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kakkurrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de feel around in the water in a quick thrusting motion with a fishing spear or with a hinged frame fishing\
net ('butterfly fishing net') in search of fish.\
\\xv Kabirir-kakkurrhme kabirir-danjbun djenj.\
\\xe They poke around and spear fish.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kakodbebuldi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de An outstation south of Mumeka on a large billabong not far from the Mann River. The place name is also the name for the larger regional estate estate.\
\\et fv:Ka-kodbe-buldi 'it-Cayratia.trifolia-lies.buried'\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kakre\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de walk around at night\
\
\\lx Kakudju\
\\ps n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re Gaagudju language name\
\\de Name for the Gaagudju language.\
\\dt 10/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx Kakunidjdji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de black soil plain and thicket country in fv:Marrin clan estate 'across the Liverpool River from\
fv:Manbulukarri'. Visited in the late wet season for fv:man-djurlukkun berries.\
\\sy Midjibirri, Djibirri.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kalaba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de large individual of male antilopine kangaroo\
\\sc Macropus antilopinus\
\\xv Nakarluwakarluwa an-berrk ya mani bad ka-warddedi kunj kalaba kumekke ka-rri.\
\\xe At Nakarluwakarluwa in the open country where there are rocks there are very large male Antilopine\
kangaroos there.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kalabarddaman\
\\ps n.\
\\ge resin\
\\re rock resin\
\\re resin on rock surface\
\\de Kind of resin found on the surface of rocks. Some people think it is made by bees and others say it is another ant-like insect that secretes the resin. When heated, it softens and can be used as a fixative e.g. to attach a point to the shaft of a spear or the nose of a spear thrower to the handle.\
\\xv Nawu kalabarddaman kamarnbun kuk-black one mayh namekke nuk njale kangeyyo. Nawu kalabarddaman kamarnbun. Bod mak njale kamarnbun, minj bod, [...] djak kakukrohrok mayh.\
\\xe The fv:kalabarddaman bug is black but I don\'92t know what it\'92s called. The thing that makes kalabarddaman resin. It\'92s not the bees that make it, it\'92s like a kind of ant, a creature like that.\
\\sy bardakikkik\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\ur I, E= bardakikkik\
\\dt 25/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx kaladjarr\
\\va kaladjdjarr\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge deaf\
\\re deaf\
\\de Deaf.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge heedless\
\\re heedless\
\\de Heedless; person who doesn't listen to reason.\
\\dt 19/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kalahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de put 'colour' on to something\
\\bw from English 'colour'\
\
\\lx Kalardadj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Bolkngok estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx kalarlbba\
\\va kalarlba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de oxeye herring, tarpon\
\\sc Megalops cyprinoides\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\uv I = warlkkarrah\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kalarlh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de bream-like fish\
\
\\lx kalarr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Corymbia.bleeseri\
\\re fi:Corymbia_bleeserii\
\\re smooth-stemmed bloodwood\
\\de smooth-stemmed bloodwood \
\\sc Corymbia bleeserii\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kalarrdju\
\\va Alarrdju\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety Iwaidja/Amurdak patriclan in the Mt Permain and Mangulkan region of north-west Arnhem Land\
\\ee Many Bininj Kunwok speakers call this clan fv:Kalarrdju whilst Iwaidja and Mawng speakers call it fv:Alarrdju. Other regional\
orthographic representations are fv:Galarrju, fv:Alarrju.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\uv W, I\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kalarrirri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate\
\
\\lx kalarrk\
\\ps n.\
\\de Small or juvenile specimens of sooty grunter (in Kuninjku dialect). This is also a Kundjeyhmi name for the ordinary sized black bream.\
\\sc Hephaestus fuliginosus\
\\xv Dunbuhmanj na-kimuk la kalarrk na-yahwurd, dangdjokku na-mekke.\
\\xe Large Sooty Grunters are called fv:dunbuhmanj and the smaller ones with small pursed lips are called fv:kalarrk.\
\\uv I, Kdj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kalarru\
\\ps n.\
\\de cigarette (ready made)\
\\bw from Makassarese kal\uc0\u729 ru? 'to roll up; cigar'.\
\
\\lx kalarrwirdwird\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Eastern curlew (may also include grey plover and oriental plover)\
\\sc Numenius madagascariensis\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kalawan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Gould's Sand Monitor\
\\sc Veranus gouldii\
\\sn 2\
\\de generic term for all goannas.\
\\pdn kk = mayawurlhwurl\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kalawan Kabadlerrh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Barabba clan estate\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kalawan mayawu\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Polymeria.ambigua\
\\re plant sp.\
\\re fi:Polymeria_ambigua\
\\de Kind of prostrate herb with vine-like stems and pinkish-purple flowers.\
\\sc Polymeria ambigua, |fs\{but may also include\} fi:Hibiscus_menzeliae |fs\{which has a similar large pink flower\}\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= kalawan, (or synonym) mayawu\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Osbeckia.australiana\
\\re fi:Osbeckia_australiana\
\\re shrub sp.\
\\re plant sp.\
\\de Slender shrub up to 1.5m with purple-pink flower.\
\\sc Osbeckia australiana\
\\sn 3\
\\ge Ipomea.gracilis\
\\re fi:Ipomea_gracilis\
\\de Kind of trailing vine, with named small and large leaf varieties.\
\\xv Kalawan mayawu an-worryahwurd, karrbilk an-worrbalabala.\
\\xe Kalawan mayawu is the small leafed variety and karrbilk has wide leaves.\
\\sc Ipomea gracilis\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kalawan Rakbom\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site on an eastern tributary of the upper East Alligator river in an open sandy valley. Kalawan Rakbom is just a couple of kilometres upstream of where this tributary meets the East Alligator, about 47km southeast (upstream) from Cahill's Crossing. The place name literally means 'Goanna ran off'. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx kalawhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de place up high\
\\pde -barnname\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kalawhmiken\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de be situated in a high place\
\\pde -barndi\
\\xv Konjkonj ka-kalawhmiken.\
\\pde Wayarra ka-barndi.\
\\xe There is a spirit being sitting up there.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kalawhmiken\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de be situated in a high place\
\\pde\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kalawo\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de burial or mortuary platform where the deceased wrapped in paperbark were laid out.\
\
\\lx kalawu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de platform, made from timber and once used to lay out the deceased. The body would lie on these\
platforms until only the bones remained.\
\\dv Balabbala nawu kun-kare bindi-barnameng birrih-doweng.\
\\sy djerrbbarl\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kaledjerrk\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de woven string bag\
\\pde djerrh\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kalh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de grindstone\
\\ee Birri-ngowkmeng man-ko birri-marnbom.\
\\xe They would grind (on a stone) and make waterlily damper.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kalidjan\
\\pref\
\\va ngal-bulanj\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv Konda dalukwern, daluk boken, bininj nakka, nuye nabininjkobeng berrewoneng. \
Kareh kalidjan belinj kareh, ngalbininjkobeng bokenh, nabininjkobeng nakudji. \
\\xe Here is group of women (in a painting), they are his wives, he is the husband of the two women. Maybe \
they are of kalidjan and belinj subsection, two wives and one husband.\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\cf2 \\lx kalikan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re have sex with\
\\de Have sex with.\
\\xv Lumaluma benhkalikang morlelehmorlenj nawu Macassanbeh kore kukku.\
\\xe Lumaluma had sex with all the Macassan women in the water.\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 60\
\\id DK\
\\dt 14/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx kalikarren\
\\va kalekarren\
\\ps v. recip.\
\\ge have.sex\
\\re sexual relationship (be in), having sex\
\\de Having sex, be in sexual relationship.\
\\xv Kare kabarri-kalikarren yerre. (Kdj, Djnj)\
\\xe They might be having sex there (in the back of the ute).\
\\dt 21/Jan/2009\cf0 \
\
\\lx kaliyi\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\re married woman\
\\de Married woman.\
\\sy Na-bininjkobeng ka-karrme.\
\\xe She has a husband.\
\
\\lx kaliyi\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\re married man\
\\de Married man.\
\
\\lx kaliyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re be married\
\\de Be married.\
\\xv \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ngaldaluk narangem wanjh kabenekabun. Kabenehkaliyo karrabuberhbun wanjh.\
\\xe The female and the male [emus] both sit on the eggs. They are a married couple and so the eggs then hatch.\
\\dt 17/Sep/2016\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\\lx kalkbarn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Shovelnose Shark\
\
\\lx kalkberd\
\\ps n.\
\\de male wallaroo or euro\
\\sc Macropus robustus\
\\cf see fv:wolerrk\
\\pdn kk = njamlurruk\
\\ee REM=bamdjirribih\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kalkkalk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dragon.sp\
\\re two-lined dragon\
\\re fi:Diporiphora_spp.\
\\de Various lined-dragons e.g.two-lined dragon and the eastern white-lipped two-lined dragon\
\\sc Diporiphora bilineata, Diporiphora albilabris sobria\
\\pdn kk= kerngborlh (I)\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= marladj, Kdj= kulirri, W= madjandemed, Djnj= kengborlh, marladj, kulurrih\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\
\\lx kalme\
\\ps formative\
\\ge be_erect\
\\re penis become erect\
\\de Formative in fv:berdkalme 'erect penis, have erection'\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kalngbuy\
\\va kalngbuyh\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge food.taboo\
\\re animal food under ceremonial restriction or taboo\
\\de Animal temporarily forbidden to family of young boy who speared it as his first kill.\
\\xv Wanjh ngal-badjan bi-marneyimeng "Yun nakka yi-ngun nakkan kalngbuyh na-djakerr\
ngorrkang".\
\\xe Then his mother told him, "Don't eat that, it's restricted food that your younger brother carried".\
\\sn 2\
\\ge term.address\
\\re ceremonial term of address for young man who has killed his first game\
\\de Ceremonial age-grade term used for a young man who is under ceremonial food restriction after killing his first game. A boy called fv:kalngbuyh cannot give any game he has killed to any young relatives. He must give it only to old men or women. He cannot give it to his mother but only his mother's older sisters who he calls fv:murla.\
\\bw A loan from Yolngu Matha g\'e4lngbuy 'game killed by male before puberty', cf. fi:galng 'hunting'.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kalngun\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de eye\
\\pde kun-mim\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kalngunjkorrongko\
\\ps n.\
\\ge antilopine.wallaroo\
\\re male antilopine wallaroo (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de male antilopine wallaroo\
\\sc Macropus antilopinus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde karndakidj (E), korlobbarr (W)\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kalorrhyi\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on Mann River in fv:Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kalorrlorrhyo\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kalublubmini\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area by the Gumardir River, around 3km from where the Gumardir (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer) flows off the escarpment southeast of its confluence with the Goomadeer. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kaluk\
\\ps adv.\
\\sn 1\
\\de after 2. and then?\
\\xv kaluk rerre\
\\xe later, after\
\\xv Marne-mulewan ngandi-wong ngam-kang nguddangke kaluk yi-ben-marne-yimen la ngare.\
\\xe I've brought a message for you which they told me. I'll tell you and you tell them because I'm going.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kalukku\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de coconut\
\\bw from Makassarese kal\uc0\u729 ku 'coconut'.\
\
\\lx kamabudjudmi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de grass spirit\
\
\\lx Kamanemdi\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in the Kunburray estate.\
\\xv Mirurr arri-yoy wanjh malahmalayi Ngalurdbirrhmi arri-yoy. Kumekke-beh barrhbuni wanjh Berddolkko arri-wam arri-yoy arri-derrehmi Mibarra. Kumekke arri-yoy karrbarda arri-nguni wanjh arri-derrehmi Kamanemdi. Kumekke-beh arri-dolkkayi arri-wam Yolngbuyken. Malayi arri-djalbolkyurrhkeyi Nadjabba, Kurrbbirnbaleng arri-yoy. Nadjabba bim nakuken.\
\\xe We camped at Mirurr and then in the mroning we went to Ngalurdbirrhmi and camped there. From there, at first light we walked to Berddolkko and then moved further to Mibarra. We camped there and ate long yams and then coninued on to Kamanemdi. From there we set off for Yolngbuyken. The next morning we would walk past Nadjabba and arrive at Kurrbbirnbaleng where we would camp. Nadjabba is a an important rock art site.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx kamanj\
\\va ngal-bangardi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W= ngal-bangardi, Kdj= al-bangardi\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kamarlang\
\\ps adj.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de good, fine OK\
\\pde ka-mak\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kamarlhkamarl\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Cleome.viscosa\
\\re fi:Cleome_viscosa\
\\de mustard bush (also known outside of Australia as Asian spiderflower), a kind of shrub (0.5-1m) with yellow flower in wet to mid dry season. Grows well in disturbed areas, by roadsides and in abundance after hot fires.\
\\xv Man-kamarlhkamarl manih ba-kobom mankungwi wuleh yi-yawayawa.\
\\xe The mustard bush is flowering, go and look now for honey hives.\
\\ee The illustrative text given here is a song in the Nabarlek song set sung originally by Kune/Dangbon speaker David Kalbuma and then handed on to the Nabarlek Band at Manmoyi.\
\\sc Cleome viscosa |fs\{and possibly also a\} Tephrosia sp. \
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kamarn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Arum.plant\
\\re Arum plant species\
\\re fi:Amorphophallus_paeoniifolius\
\\de Arum plant; kind of yam which has toxins that must be processed before the tuber is edible\
\\xv Kamarn arri-ngun an-me manu yiman an-didjdjanku rerri.\
\\xe The fv:kamarn Arum plant is edible and is similar to the fv:an-didjdjanku Arum tuber.\
\\sc Amorphophallus paeoniifolius\
\\uv W, Kdj, I\
\\ur Djnj= morlkalk\
\\ee Some Kundjeyhmi speakers say the larger specimens are fv:kamarn and the smaller (which are eaten in preference to the larger) are called fv:morlkalk.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kamarangdjabdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Creek with rocky banks and a small waterfall in the Djalbangurrk estate. Located in a remote stone country area about 5km east of the upper Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer), however the water flows northeast from here away from the Gumardir. It eventually becomes Kumarringbang Creek (mapped as \'91Manggabor Creek\'92) which flows past Kumarrirnbang outstation. Kamarangdjabdi is about 21km northwest of Kabulwarnamyo outstation. There are long neck turtles and freshwater crocodiles here.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kamarayik\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A little gulley between two hills, flat with rocky outcrops in the Djalbangurrk estate. A delek (\'91white clay\'92) site. Located in a remote stone country area east of the upper Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer), however the water flows northeast from here away from the Gumardir. It eventually becomes Kumarringbang Creek (mapped as \'91Manggabor Creek\'92) which flows past Kumarrirnbang outstation. Kamarayik is about 23km northwest of Kabulwarnamyo outstation.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kamarrang\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\sd kinship\
\\de male subsection name of yirridjdja moiety\
\\uv W\
\\uv I,E=bangardi.\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kamarrang\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\sd kinship\
\\de female subsection name of yirridjdja moiety\
\\uv W\
\\uv I,E.\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kamarrang\
\\pref\
\\va na-bangardi\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Ka-mudjkenhyo kumekke, marrek ngarray ba.... helicopter kani-re maitbi Kamarrang ngudda banbanibukkan. Ngalyangdoh.\
\\xe They are rainbow serpents, dreaming beings in the landscape, we can't go there... but perhaps by helicopter I could show you and Kamarrang, \
that woman there, Ngalyangdoh.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd kinship\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= fv:kamarrang\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Kamarrkawarn\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place and outstation community in Kodwalewale estate on the Mann River.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx kambani\
\\ps n.\
\\de sharing relationship usually referring to land ownership jointly held by members of different clans.\
\\xv Kondanj na-kurrngh ke kun-red, ngarrewoneng 'kambani'.\
\\xe This is your cousin's country which I hold with him in a 'company' relationship.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kambarrikambarri\
\\ps n.\
\\ge burdekin.duck\
\\re Burdekin duck\
\\re fi:Tadorna_radjah\
\\re Radjah shelduck\
\\de Burdekin duck, also known as radjah shelduck.\
\\sc Tadorna radjah\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= karrhkirala\
\\sy karrhkiyala, karrhkirala\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx kambe\
\\ps n.\
\\ge termite.mound\
\\re termite mound\
\\de Termite mound. Sections broken off can be used as cooking stones in ground ovens.\
\\xv Yimray nga-ngalkeng man-kung, nanih man-kung kah-di kure mikambe.\
\\xe Come, I've found this honey hive here in this termite mound.\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= kun-boy, Kdj= kun-kurlbbinj\
\\cf konjdja, kurlbbinj, djibdjib\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kambuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de small crab species\
\\xv Kabarlekidyo kambuk djang ka-yo.\
\\xe At Kabarlekidyo there is a fv:kambuk crab dreaming site.\
\
\\lx Kambukkakarung\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Section of a small creek in the Maburrinj estate. There is a camping place here in a pocket of land where the creek meanders around. Kambukkakarung is on a traditional east-west walking route from Mararrkiwu at the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River to Ngalurdbirrhmi and the Kumarrirnbang estate. It lies about 4km east of this confluence. The site name literally means \'91The small crab digs\'92. \
\\xv Kaboyirriyo Kumarduba, Kambukkakarung.\
\\xe  Along this creek are the sites Kumarduba and Kambukkakarung.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kamdjorrhdjorrh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Agile Wallaby\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kornobolo.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kamukke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de bury, cover in dirt 2. extinguish\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde 1. -dudje 2. -dombun\
\\xv Karri-kamukkerren kun-kabuy.\
\\pde Karri-dudjerren kun-kurlk.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kamulkbarn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan with two discontiguous estates (and lineages), one in north-west Arnhem Land and the other near the mouth of the\
Liverpool River\
\\xv Yoh ka-bolkdadjme kumekke bedberre kondabeh bedberre Marlbbarrdji bedman Kamulkbarn beh, bad nakka\
kabirri-yiraworren. \
\\xe Yes, the boundary for them, the Marlbbarrdji clan is on this side and the Kamulkbarn are this way [indicates downstream], but they all\
joined together [shared their land].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx kan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de take or carry\
\\ng past perf.=kang, past imperf.= kayi\
\\cf -mkan\
\\ce bring\
\\pdn kk = -yirrolkan\
\
\\lx Kanabarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place south west of Mumeka, large swamp and intermittent stream area which like fv:Yardarr dries in\
fv:yekke and becomes a popular wallaby hunting area.\
\\ee duwa, fv:bolk-kurulk\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kanalanj\
\\va kun-karnalanj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sn 1\
\\de sugar\
\\pde djukka\
\\sn 2\
\\de sand\
\\pdv ordinary language word for 'sand'\
\\uv I, W\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kanankadjbel\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A vehicular crossing and billabong on the creek which flows from the Mandilbareng spring. Kanankadjbel billabong just east of the crossing, some 4km southwest of Mamadawerre outstation by the Goomadeer River. An important fishing place for things such as freshwater prawns, black bream and eel-tailed catfish. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kanangarridjmeng\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de  Jungle spring associated with flying foxes near the Kumalbimuk hills west of the Goomadeer [Kumadderr] river. Adjacent to Rurrkkarrkken. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kanbelarridj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge shrub sp.\
\\re Templetonia shrub\
\\de shrub (1-3m) found in sandstone habitat with fine branchlets and needle-like foliage with a distinctive black\
seed pod.\
\\xv Kanbelarridj kadarlehme karayekmen. Kebno arri-djeddjedme borndok-ken arri-yami kunj.\
\\xe The cockroach bush dries out and becomes hard. We fashion the nose peg for spear throwers from it in order\
to spear kangaroos.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Templetonia hookeri\
\\bb Brock 2001:312\
\\dt 18/Aug/2004\
\
\\lx kanbulerri\
\\ps n.\
\\de Male euro. Some dialects reserve this name for only very large specimens of the male euro and use the name fv:kalkberd for normal sized males.\
\\sc Macropus robustus\
\\xv Kalkberd kanbulerri, na-kimuk kanbulerri.\
\\xe A large fv:Macropus robustus is called Kanbulerri.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd mammal\
\
\\lx Kandadjdja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name\
\\de one of the fi:yikurrumu ritualistic names for the Kurulk clan, others being Marnayemarra and Wurrkku\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kanded\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de waist\
\
\\lx kandiddjawa\
\\ps n.\
\\de flour, damper\
\\bw from Makassarese kanre jawa 'cake'.\
\\pdn kk = kabbarrk\
\
\\lx Kandilerr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place name, site of fv:kun-kurra wind dreaming.\
\
\\lx kandirrikkal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de wild orange tree\
\\sc Capparis umbonata\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx kandjadi\
\\ps n.\
\\de the land owning clan of a ceremony. For example, if a Yabburdurrwa is held at a Kardbam site, then all\
the Kardbam clan members will be fv:kandjadi for that ceremony. fv:Kandjadi have special ceremonial\
responsibilities.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kandjarra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan associated with Dangbon and Kune languages\
\\xv Yo djal namekke Wakmarranj-ken fi:open ka-djaldi money-ken nga-wohmang. Djal Kandjarra yi-djalbalhmen.\
\\xe Yes, just keep the Wakmarranj clan region open [for mining exploration] so I can get a bit of money from it. But just close off the\
Kandjarra clan estate [to mining exploration].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kandji\
\\ps n.\
\\ge jabiru\
\\re jabiru (black-necked stork)\
\\re black-necked stork\
\\re fi:Ephippiorhynchus_asiaticus\
\\de Black-necked stork, also known as the jabiru.\
\\sc Ephippiorhynchus asiaticus\
\\pdn kk = djanarra\
\\ee Associated with the fv:yirridjdja moiety.\
\\uv W=djakarna\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kandjibadjan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Black-winged stilt\
\\sc Himantopus himantopus.\
\
\\lx Kandjikarrangen\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djok clan estate, billabong.\
\
\\lx Kandjirrbi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Spring in a jungle thicket about 12km west of the Goomadeer [Kumadderr] river, west-northwest of the Kabbari complex.  \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kane-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 1st person trial (1,2 unit augmented) intransitive pronominal prefix, 'we' (you 2 and I)\
\\xv Yi-bengkan nawu ngad kane-wam?\
\\xe Remember that time when we 3 went?\
\\sn 2\
\\de 1st person trial subject, 3rd person singular object (1,2 unit augmented/3 minimal).\
\\xv Kane-re kane-kurrme kanem-durndeng.\
\\xe Let's go (we 3) put it and come back.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kanem\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kanemno\
\\ps n.\
\\de ears\
\\xv yi-kanem!\
\\xe Hey, you got ears? (listen to me!)\
\\pdn kk = kun-mardorrk\
\
\\lx kanembirlmanj\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge ear.wax\
\\re ear wax\
\\de ear wax; can be used in an expression to mean 'having blocked ears, not able to listen'\
\\xv Kan-bekkan yi-kanembirlmanj!\
\\xe Listen to me! Has ear wax made you deaf!\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kanembirlmanj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 1\
\\de ear wax\
\
\\lx kanemdjorrhyahwurd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de earlobe\
\
\\lx kanemyirriyo\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de have long eyes\
\\dv kanem-kuyeng\
\
\\lx kanemred\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge earlobe\
\\re earlobe\
\\de Ear-lobe.\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 23/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kanin\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge digging.stick\
\\re digging stick\
\\de Digging stick, especially used by women for gathering yams, digging tuber foods or finding long-neck turtles.\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= kun-balkbu, Djnj= djadjno\
\\pdn kk = kun-budjub\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx kankangehken\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de a prostrate herb with perrenial root stock\
\\sc Stemona australiana\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx kanmarrwala\
\\sd mythology\
\\ps n.\
\\de mimih spirit from rock country.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\cf see fv:mimih\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kanmilanmila\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de light morph of the brown falcon\
\\xv Kakukbame kanmilanmila kodjok, ngudda kurduk bulanj wunwunbu.\
\\xe The light morph of the brown falcon is called fv:kanmilanmila but you Bulanj are the dark morph, fv:wunwunbu.\
\\sc Falco berigora\
\\ee The brown falcon is an important totem in the fv:lorrkkon hollow log ossuary ceremony. The light morph fv:kanmilanmila belongs to men of the fv:kodjok subsection. Public songs are performed in the camp for a number of nights and then the men and young initiates retire to a secret camp on the final few nights of the ceremony. One public song in the fv:lorrkkon ceremony which refers to the light morph of the brown falcon has the following text:   Kanmilanmila kanmilanmila durungandja, duruwaddabi duruwaddabi ('Brown falcon catches grasshoppers in the smoke')\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kangalarddja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Waridjngu clan estate\
\\uv E, Kun-dedjnjenghmi\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kanganadbun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de billabong and seasonal camp in Djok clan estate.\
\
\\lx kange\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge emotions\
\\re emotion\
\\de Psychological seat of emotions.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge heart\
\\re heart\
\\de Heart.\
\\dt 23/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kangemak\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\ge happy\
\\re happy\
\\de Happy, be in good spirits.\
\\dt 23/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kangebakme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.shocked\
\\re shocked, startled, stunned (e.g. by hearing bad news)\
\\de Be shocked, startled, stunned, experience emotional breakdown.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kangedubdubme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de heart beat\
\
\\lx kangemang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make OBJ feel affection, sentiment or subjective response\
\\xv None namekke weleng nga-wokdiwokdi. None namekke ngan-kangemey\
\\xe I'll keep talking about None [the honey wasp]. That None honey wasp spirit has caught our affection.\
\\xv Murrikang ngarduk bakmeng ngan-kangemey.\
\\xe That truck of mine broke and I really valued it.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kangewarre\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\ge feel.unhappy\
\\re unhappy, feeling bad\
\\de Unhapppy, feeling bad.\
\\dt 23/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kangila\
\\pr na-\
\\va bulanj\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\ng\
\\xv Ngayi na-kangila na-kardbam.\
\\xe I am na-kangila skin, Kardbam patri-clan.\
\\ee Note that in the Ndj\'e9bbana language at Maningrida, the subsection name fv: kangila\
without a prefix iequates with the Bininj Kun-wok name fv:bulanj\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv W, Kdj= na-kangila\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= bulanj\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kangila\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr al-\
\\va bulanjdjan\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku\
matri-moiety\
\\ng\
\\xv Ngal-kangila ngayiken ngarduk, ba-wurlhkeyi nga-nang.\
\\xe Ngal-kangila, my relative (infer 'my mother's mother'), I used to watch her do burning.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv W= ngal-kangila, Kdj= al-kangila\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= bulanjdjan\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kangkinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de nephew or niece, a man's ZS, ZD.\
\
\\lx kangkinj\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.our nephew/niece, we are same sex siblings. 2.our fv:doydoy, we are same\
sex siblings.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kangokme\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site on the Goomadeer River, around a kilometre downstream from the confluence of the \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 tributaries. Located near near the entrance to where the Goomadeer flows downstream through a large gorge (flowing to the north-east). There is a waterfall downstream. Literally means \'91it-barks\'92. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kanj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kanjno\
\\ps n.\
\\de meat, muscle, flesh\
\\xv nga-kanj-djawinj-nome kuluban\
\\xe I can smell flying fox meat cooking.\
\
\\lx kanj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kanjno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge meat\
\\re meat\
\\de meat, flesh\
\\xv\
\\xe\
\\sn 2\
\\ge muscle\
\\re muscle\
\\de muscle\
\\dt 21/Mar/2007\
\\nt this entry is not finished, needs xv for various senses, and compounds on kanj\
\
\\lx Kanjarladjkendi\
\\va Njarladj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de One of the most important sites in the Kabbari complex relating to the crying orphan story. The site is a steep gorge in a bend of the Goomadeer River just upstream of Kunyikuymi. Abbreviated sometimes to \'91Njarladj\'92. The Kunwinjku word for \'91orphan\'92 is usually marladj. In this case, the initial nasal is different.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kanjbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Butcher, peel meat off during butchering or when eating a cut of meat.\
\\xv Ngarri-kanjbuni dja birribuyika nawu birridahkendongi kore fs:carton.\
\\xe We would cut up the meat and another group would do the packing into cartons.\
\\dt 12/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx kanjdji\
\\ps loc. adv\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge down\
\\re down, below\
\\re lower down\
\\de down, below, lower down\
\\xv Wurdurd kanjdji, ngurri-kengemen!\
\\xe You boys look down (at the ground) and be fearful.\
\\xv Ngalmangeyi barri-yawani nani midjno wanjh barri-weleng njamedmi wanjh barri-durrkmi barri-ngalkeyi. Ka-ngehme\
kanjdji ka-yo.\
\\xe They would look for turtles by looking for the breathing holes of their burrows and they would whatsit, find them and pull them out. It\
breathes from underneath the ground.\
\\xv Ka-bonolbnolbme kaddum kanjdjibe kah-bowayhme.\
\\xe It (the spring) bubbles up to the surface, the water is lifted up from down below.\
\\ee Note that this term can function as a directional in relation to both distance towards a watercourse and in relation to the direction of\
flow of a watercourse. Approaching a watercourse at an angle of 90 degrees to the direction of flow is moving fi:kanjdji as would be\
moving parallel to the direction of the flow of the watercourse.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge inside\
\\re inside\
\\de inside\
\\xv Dulklorrkkelorrkken daluk, ngal-kanemkuyeng, ku-rurrk ka-yo. Ku-rrulk, ka-djalyo bu ku-rrulk ka-wodjbakme\
yi-bengkan ka-yo kanjdjikanjdjibeh nomo ku-rrulk, kanjdjikanjdji ku-rrulk bu ka-yo. \
\\xe The dulklorrkkelorrkken female spirit being has long ears and she lives inside. She lives in the tree, such as a tree which has a broken\
trunk, you know, she sleeps inside the tree, not up in it, but inside the hollow log.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge downstream\
\\re downstream\
\\de downstream, lowlands, area towards the coast or lower down in a drainage basin\
\\xv Ngalbinjdjad dja mahni karrbarda ngal-kuken dja mahni an-kabo djarre kanjdji.\
\\xe At Ngalbinjdjad and this place here are important places for long yams, and also a long way along this creek downstream from here.\
\\xv Mongkebaldeng, kanjdji ngamed kukawadj, Kurrekbinj kanjdji ngaleh kaboyo anbokuyeng Mibudyibudyi, kanjdji kabale Midjandadj, kanjdji kare Wohwohkani, kanjdji kumekke Kolorrhyi.\
\\xe Mongkebaldeng [a place], downstream to whatsit on the sand, Kurrekbinj, downstream the water is a long stretch of river [at] Mibudyibudyo, downstream it goes to Wohwohkani, and downstream there to Kolorrhyi.\
\\sy kilhken\
\\pdn kk = kilhken\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 22/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kanjdjikanjdji\
\\ps n.\
\\va kanjdjihkanjdji\
\\ge lowlands\
\\re lowlands\
\\de Lowlands, down near a water course.\
\\dt 22/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kanjok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de brother-in-law, wife, husband, sister-in-law, MBD, MBS,MMBDS,MMBDD.\
\
\\lx kanjok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my brother-in-law, your son, you are my uncle.\
\\cn na-kanjok\
\\sn 2\
\\de My wife, your fv:ngal-kurrng, you are my uncle.\
\\cn ngal-kanjok.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kanjok\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my son/daughter, your spouse, you are my nephew/niece. 2.My\
fv:ngal-kurrng, your wife, you are my nephew\
\\cn kanjok.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kanjwelewelme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge meat.hanging\
\\re meat hanging down\
\\de meat hanging down, usually as carried by a hunter after game has been caught and butchered\
\\xv Ngarri-nguni, ngokkowi wanjh barri-nani kobohbanj weleng nani ngarri-walayyidurndeng kanjwelewelmeng ngadman\
wurdwurd bebbebe bedman dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe We would eat it and in the late afternoon they would see the adults coming and we would go back with the cuts of meat swinging as we\
carried them with enough for the children and for the adults.\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx kanjwerr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de fruit of the water lily carried under the water\
\\sc Nymphaea violacea.\
\\xv Kanjwerr mim-rayek bu ngarri-dong.\
\\xe The seeds of the waterlily fruit are hard if we pound them.\
\\pdn kk = narrenku\
\\uv I, E\
\\uv W= barradjungka, man-djungka\
\\dt 25/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx kanjwerr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de ?\
\\nt CHECK\
\
\\lx kardab\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge spider\
\\re spider\
\\de generic term for spiders\
\\sn 2\
\\ge spider's web\
\\re spider's web\
\\de spider's web\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx kardabad\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Desmos.wardianus\
\\re fi:Desmos_wardianus\
\\de kind of stone country plant\
\\xv An-kardabad ku-wardde ka-rri an-me ka-karrme barrk djukerre ka-ngun.\
\\xe The fi:Desmos_wardianus plant grows in the stone country and black wallaroos eat its fruit.\
\\sc Desmos wardianus\
\\uv Kdj, Djnj, I, W\
\\sy an-djarrawok\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kardabaybay\
\\ps n.\
\\ge darter\
\\re Australian darter\
\\re fi:Anhinga_melanogaster_novaehollandiae\
\\de Australian darter\
\\sy kunwardde karrulubun\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= djingarrarr, mandjangarli, E= kunbad karrulubun\
\\sc Anhinga melanogaster novaehollandiae\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kardadjirr\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Syzygium_armstrongii\
\\re fi:Syzygium_armstrongii\
\\de Large evergreen tree (12-20m) which grows along freshwater streams and has an edible white fruit in the wet season, is also used as an ichthycide.\
\\xv An-kardadjirr kurlahno arri-bun arri-ngolung ka-njerreyhme ka-bangwayhme wanjh arri-djuhke djenj ka-rrowen.\
\\xe We pound the bark of fi:Syzygium_armstrongii, warm it over a fire and when it starts sizzling, the poison comes out and we put it in the water and the fish die.\
\\sc Syzygium armstrongii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-kindjilkkindjilk, E= man-kindjirrbinj\
\\ee The 'white apple' fruit is edible but not favoured and is available from fv:kunumeleng to fv:kudjewk.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kardakku\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spear.thrower\
\\re spear thrower\
\\de Spear thrower.\
\\uv Kun-walidjaw clan lect of fv:Kulmarru clan.\
\\ur Ordinary dialect= borndok\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 17/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx Kardalakardala\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\ge prop.n.\
\\re placename in Marrkolidjban estate region\
\\de place in Marrkolidjban estate, lower Liverpool River district, with a billabong and site of a lorrkkon bone pole coffin.\
\\dt 22/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Kardbam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan with two discontiguous estates and lineages, one of fi:yirridjdja moiety to the north-east of the Arnhem Land plateau and another of mixed moieties in north-west Arnhem Land in the King River region.\
\\xv Kah-re:: Bakkarda ka-bawon kun-nguya na-Kardbamken ka-bolkbawon kam-ngimen wali Wurrbbarnbulu-ken wanjh ka-ngimen. \
\\xe They [the Nakorrkko, referred to by a non-plural subject prefix] kept going for a long way and they leave the Bakkarda fi:yikurrumu estate, that is namely the Kardbam clan estate and then in turn they go into the Wurrbbarnbulu clan estate, then they entered that one.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Karddurra\
\\va Kardurra, Kadurra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\de name of a patriclan in north-west Arnhem Land associated with both Iwaidja and Kunib'dji groups.\
\\xv Durndi Nakorrkko Barlbbanarrabeh durndi manekke Manawukan man-kabo kabomey. Wam man-kurladj djorlno\
kurrmeng koyek Djudda Maningrida, Manawukan. Djudda manekke borledmeng kun-kurra kurrmeng manu bedberre\
Kela nuye  na-yikkarddurra. Kurrmeng bedberre Karddurra.\
\\xe The Nakorrkko went back to Maningrida fom Barlbbanarra reaching the [Liverpool River]. They placed the ripe Eleocharis dulcis\
corms (swamp rush nuts) to the east [of Maningrida] at Ndj\'fadda Point near Maningirda. At Ndj\'fadda they turned around [and went\
west] and put the wind dreaming there for Kela, that Karddurra clansman. They put it [the wind dreaming] there and it belongs to all\
the Karddurra people.\
\\ee This clan has an estate in north-west Arnhem Land in the Wak/Marrkanalal (i.e. Murganella) region and is associated with the Iwaidja\
language. There is also an association with the Wurnal clan near Maningrida and Ndj\'fadda Point and thus the Nakorrkko story given in\
the illustrative sentence above. The Iwaidja pronunciation does not have a long stop and in Iwaidja orthography is written as Gadurra\
(or Gardurra, reflecting a variety of pronunciations for this name).\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\\lx karderre\
\\va kardderre\
\\ps n.\
\\de wild honey type produced by native stingless bees of the genus fv:Austrophebeia, possibly fi:Austrophebeia_magna.\
\\xv Nani yiman ka-mimkurrme an-kung, bad nungka karnmono ba-rungi ba-karnmorungi, nabiwo lorlbban nawu ngarrkardba njale nawu ba-rungi na-djalkudji karderre.\
\\xe The bees would make an entrance tube and when the forked branch was 'cooked' [i.e. mature], you'd have all kinds of honey; fv:nabiwo, fv:lorlbban, fv:ngarrkardba, or maybe just one would 'cook' [become mature], that fv:karderre.\
\\sy bobbidj\
\\uv E, Kdj\
\\ur Rembarrnga= yurduh\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kardid\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fern.sp.\
\\re fi:Platyzoma_microphyllum\
\\re fern sp.\
\\de Terrestrial clumping fern associated with sandy soils.\
\\ee Some Kundjeyhmi speakers have identified fv:an-kardid as fi:Imperata_cylindrica, a perennial grass that grows up to a metre tall with hard creeping rhizomes which after burning can form sharp stubs which can inflict great pain when walked on.\
\\sc Platyzoma microphyllum\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= manborlidj-manborlidj, Kdj= an-djilard\
\\sd plant\
\\p dspace-dev.anu.edu.au/dspace-xmlui/handle/1030.58/19557, DSC05777.jpg\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kardirdi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cricket.sp.\
\\re cricket sp., ground tunnelling cricket\
\\de wingless burrowing cricket (not yet identified)\
\\xv Nawu kardirdi nungan, kondah kah-di kuberrk. Yi-burrbun ka-bolkkaruhkarung, kukkurduk nawu yi-nan.\
\\xe That black tunnelling cricket, it lives in the open. You know, it burrows into the ground and you can see it's black (or dark) in colour.\
\\sc Apterogryllus sp.\
\
\\lx Kardilwirrme\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kardirri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de earwig\
\\sc Labidura riparia\
\
\\lx kardmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de snare or catch up OBJ\
\\xv Kun-yarl ngan-dengekardmey.\
\\xe The fishing line caught up my foot.\
\\xv Wakkidj dulk-kardmey.\
\\xe The fishing line caught up/entangled the tree.\
\\xv Muddikang dulk-kardmey.\
\\xe The truck caught a stick (caused a stick to become caught up/jammed in the body of the vehicle).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kardme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge get.stuck\
\\re get stuck, jammed or lodged\
\\de Get stuck (in something), get jammed, lodged or caught in something\
\\xv Ba-rrulkkardmeng, ba-rrulkngimeng murdikka.\
\\xe The stick has got stuck, it's become lodged in the car.\
\\dt 30/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx kardukardu\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de woman, girls\
\\xv Ngane-yibonghmerrinj kardukardu.\
\\pde Ngane-yiburrinj daluk.\
\\xe We both fought over the woman.\
\\pde daluk, yawkyawk, molehmolenj\
\\ee Dalabon= k\'fard\'fak\'fard 'woman'.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karkkarawk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge night.heron\
\\re rufous night heron\
\\re heron, rufous night heron\
\\re fi:Nycticorax_caledonicus\
\\de Rufous (fi:aka Nankeen) Night Heron\
\\sc Nycticorax caledonicus\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= durukmud, W= kawk\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 15/Dec/2009\
\
\\lx karlakkarlak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de platform on which the deceased were placed after being wrapped in paperbark.\
\\dv Balabbala nawu bindih-barnnameng birrih-doweng.\
\
\\lx karlang\
\\pr kun-\
\\va karlangno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 1\
\\de shoulder 2. forked branch of a tree\
\\pdn kk = kun-mundjum.\
\
\\lx karlangkal\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de singer man\
\\nt This could be a restricted word CHECK. Kamak karri-ngeybun???\
\
\\lx Karlangkarri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de some confusion here, listed by Altman as a fv:duwa estate, but described as fv:yirridjdja by fv:Kulunba\
at fv:Mumeka.\
\\nt check?\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karlang-karrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de support, take by the shoulder\
\\xv Yim-ray kan-karlang-karrme ngarre.\
\\xe Come take me by the shoulder and let's go.\
\
\\lx karlanj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Arum.plant\
\\re Arum plant species\
\\re fi:Amorphophallus_galbra\
\\de kind of herbaceous plant of the Arum family with a subterranean tuber which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is\
rendered edible\
\\ee The tuber is roasted for one night. The plant consists of a single stalk of about 1.5m. with a head of green seeds at the top. Just\
beneath the base in the ground is the large tuber, round and flat. Rock wallabies such as the short-eared rock wallaby also eat the tuber.\
\\sc Amorphophallus galbra\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= man-danek\
\\sy djedbarlh, man-danek\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx kalalbba\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bony.bram\
\\re bony bream\
\\re fi:Nematalosa_erebi\
\\de freshwater bony bream\
\\sc Nematalosa erebi\
\\uv Kdj, I, W\
\\ur W syn.= kuwalili, kuwalilil, Kdj syn.= bardebarde, nabardebarde\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 30/Oct/2011\
\
\\lx karlarabirr\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de woman who has had lots of children.\
\\xv Yun yi-kadjung ngalkka ngalkarlarabirr nga-yaw-wern.\
\\xe Don't chase after that woman, she has lots of children [ie. she's a mother with lots of responsibilities].\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karlba\
\\ps n.\
\\ge yellow ochre\
\\re ochre, yellow\
\\re yellow ochre\
\\de yellow or mustard-coloured ochre; also may be used to describe things similarly coloured (tan, orangey yellow, mustard colours).\
\\xv Boliblib na-kuken karlba na-kare barri-karungi, mawah yiban-yime,\
na-Wurrbbarn.\
\\xe At Boliblib there is an important traditional yellow ochre mine and those you call\
father's father and his brothers of the Wurrbbarn clan used to dig it there.\
\\ee Yellow ochre is used by men of the kuyal moiety in fv:yirridjdja moiety cult ceremonies.\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx karlbbu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spearthrower\
\\re spearthrower (simple disposable version)\
\\de Simple disposable spearthrower.\
\\uv W\
\\ur Kdj= karlbbu\
\\ur Kdj= djirrk\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 30/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx karlbbo\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.platycarpa\
\\re Acacia platycarpa\
\\de kind of wattle tree or shrub, 3-7m high with cream to yellowish globular flowers\
\\sc Acacia platycarpa\
\\sy (I) man-borrelk\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= man-bongka\
\\ee There is frequent misidentification and confusion between fi:Acacia_platycarpa and fi:Acacia_mimula because of the similarity in the\
flowers, fruit and habitat. Brock (2001) describes the main differences in the size (especially width) of the leaves, time of flowering and\
the texture of the bark. fi:Acacia_platycarpa is described as having 'bark: rough and grey to brown on trunk, smooth and whitish on\
upper branches' and 'phyllodes: alternate, smooth to slightly coarse, stiff, broad, curved, upper margin strongly curved and often wavy,\
blade 11-16cm x 3-6cm, dull grey-green, 3-4 prominent raised longitudinal veins joining towards base, rounded tip.' (Brock 2001:71).\
fi:Acacia_mimula on the other hand is described as 'bark:rough, grey, fibrous to tessellated' and 'pyllodes: smooth, elongated, curved to\
sickle-shaped, widest at middle, blade 8-15 cm x 1-3cm, dull green with 2-3 prominent longitudinal veins. fi:Acacia_platycarpa flowers\
from November to July whilst fi:Acacia_mimula only from April to June (Brock 2001:68).\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx karlbbu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de small woomera often used by children for small toy spears.\
\
\\lx karldurrk\
\\va kaldurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge blue-winged.kookaburra\
\\re blue-winged kookaburra\
\\re fi:Dacelo_leachii\
\\de Blue-winged kookaburra.\
\\uv I, Kdj\
\\ur E= korrow-korrow, Kdj= barradja, kaluhkalurrku, kaldukaldurrkku\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karlerrh\
\\hm 1\
\\ps n.\
\\ge longtom\
\\re freshwater longtom\
\\re fi:Strongylura_kreffti\
\\de Freshwater long-tom.\
\\sc Strongylura kreffti\
\\ur W= kurrkabal, wurrkabal; Kun-dedjwarre clan lect= ngalkebkarlerrh, Kdj= burrukulung\
\\ee duwa moiety\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv karlerrh\
\\le 1. small lizard sp., 2. spear type\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 20/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx karlerrh\
\\hm 2\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de lizard species, small and thin\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv karlerrh\
\\le 1. fish sp., 2. spear type\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karlerrh\
\\hm 3\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear type, very long\
\\dv Man-kole man-konemkuyeng.\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv karlerrh\
\\le 1. fish sp. 2. small lizard\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Karlerrh Kumanem\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de The main river channel of the Goomadeer River just downstream from Kunyikuymi where a creek joins from the west. The name means literally \'91Freshwater longtom fi:Strongylura_kreffti It-chest\'92. The lateral may be retroflex karlerrh.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx karlewobe\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de stick fence in water courses which are designed to hold conical fish traps or fv:man-djowbu in place.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karlikarli\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de sacred boomerangs used in secret ceremonies\
\\ee These boomerangs, used in pairs, were traditionally traded up from Central Australia.\
\\ee cognate with some Central Australian languages\
\\sy barlkkan\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx karlkid\
\\pr kun-\
\\va karlkidno\
\\ps n. (incorp.)\
\\sn 1\
\\de nectar from flowers.\
\\xv Man-kung ngarri-karlkid-bongun.\
\\xe We drink the nectar from the honey (of flowers).\
\\sn 2\
\\de fluid from plants such as sap or the resin in orchids.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Also used by some older people to refer to diesel.\
\\cf man-nguy-karlkid\
\\ce nectar of flowers\
\
\\lx karlkki\
\\va karlkke, karlke\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de tadpoles\
\\xv Ka-rrabungukdeng djaddi dabuno ka-rrabuberhbun yiman karlkke.\
\\xe The frog lays eggs which hatch as tadpoles.\
\
\\lx karlko\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd bird\
\\de Magpie Goose\
\\xv Karlko ka-yakwan man-dayhmornmorndi.\
\\xn Murnubbarr ka-ngun man-kurladj.\
\\pde murnubbarr\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karlnganj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge freshwater.mangrove\
\\re fresh water mangrove\
\\re fi:Baringtonia_acutangula\
\\de Fresh water mangrove. 'When it drops seed on you [or if you touch the seeds], you get itchy and swelling'.\
\\uv I\
\\uv E =man-karlngkinj, Kdj= an-kalngki\
\\sc Baringtonia acutangula\
\\sy dan\
\\pdn man-kolh\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karlngkinj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge freshwater.mangrove\
\\re fresh water mangrove\
\\re fi:Baringtonia_acutangula\
\\de Freshwater Mangrove\
\\sc Barringtonia acutangula\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =man-karlnganj, dan, Kdj= an-kalngki\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karlwarrk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Gardenia.sp.\
\\re fi:Gardenia_resinosa\
\\de kind of Gardenia tree with reddish bark\
\\sc Gardenia resinosa\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur \
\\sd plant\
\\p ankarlwarrk/ Gardenia resinosa.jpg, ankarlwarrk/Gardenia resinosa3.jpg\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx karnalanj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\lc kun-karnalanj\
\\sn 1\
\\de sand\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-kawadj, wadjbud\
\\sn 2\
\\de sugar\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djukka\
\\nt check retrofl.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Karnamalalowmi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx karnamarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Red-tailed Black Cockatoo\
\\sc Calyptorhynchus banksii\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\uv I= ngarnarrh, E= ngarnarrngh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Karnarra\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site on a tributary which meets the upper East Alligator River from the west. This may be the creek which meets the East Alligator from the west at Ngalwanjdjarri. Djinbiri is on this same tributary. \
\\xv Walem bad Djinbiri, Karnarra, Kubowo.\
\\xe Then to the south is Djinbiri, Karnarra and Kubowo.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx karnbaldje\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of plant (unidentified), grows in monsoon jungles\
\\xv Karnbaldje kungarre yiman kayime ankabo kuwukku karri.\
\\xe The fv:karnbaldje plant grows in jungles such as in freshwater streams.\
\
\\lx karnbaldji\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re fi:Mnesithea_rottboelioides (grass)\
\\de kind of grass\
\\xv Man-karnbaldje man-dulk-rayek.\
\\xe fv:Man-karnbaldje has a hard stem.\
\\sc Mnesithea rottboelioides\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx an-karnbanj\
\\ps n.\
\\re Carpentaria palm\
\\re fi:Carpentaria_acuminata\
\\de Carpentaria palm; atall slender feather-leaved single stemmed palm to 30 m high; trunk 120-150 mm diameter with prominent rings, slightly swollen at base.\
\\sc Carpentaria acuminata\
\\ee 'The pith of the meristem is eaten raw, boiled or lightly raosted on hot coals. This 'cabbage' is considered a delicacy. The basal sheaths of the fronds are used as water carriers and temporary storage containers.' [Russell-Smith 1985:249]\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur Djnj, I= yirrkiyirrki\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Karnbirr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan on the southern Arnhem Land plateau in the upper Mann River district.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx karnbirr\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_oncinocarpa\
\\de kind of Acacia tree\
\\xv An-karnbirr ka-kobun daluworro.\
\\xe The fi:Acacia_oncinocarpa flowers in the fv:daluworro windy season.\
\\xv Yo ngurrurdu ka-djare an-burrurnburrurn ka-rri, man-me manu ngalengarre man-burrurnburrurn an-lerrelerre makka ku-djewk ka-ngun an-lerrelerre ku-djewk konguyno ka-ngun yiman an-dadjek ka-ngun mak ka-ngun an-dadjek yekkekeno njale mak an-buyika, ka-djalmimngun bu ka-mimwarrawarrhme laik ka-yakwon manu konguyno wanjh mimno ka-ngun an-dadjek, yoh an-ngale an-buyika, an-ngamed ka-ngun an-karnbirr, an-karnbirr ka-mimwon fs:because an-karnbirr an-wern kumekke Marlkawo mani ka-mimngun.\
\\xe Yes, emus like places where there is dodder laurel fruit Cassytha filiformis because this is her food and also Bossiaea bossaeoides\
which emus eat in  the wet season, the flowers of which appear in the wet season. Also they eat grevillea flowers Grevillea pteridifolia in\
July and in the dry season and  also the seeds which fall down and the falling flowers of Grevillea pteridifolia. And what else, she also\
eats Acacia oncinocarpa because they give her seeds and there are many Acacia oncinocarpa trees around Marlkawo and emus eat the\
seeds of this tree.\
\\so George Djandjomerr\
\\sc Acacia oncinocarpa\
\\uv Djnj, I, W, Kdj\
\\ur\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx karnbowh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.snake\
\\re common tree snake\
\\re fi:Dendrelaphis_punctulata\
\\re tree snake\
\\de Common tree snake.\
\\sc Dendrelaphis punctulata\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\
\\lx karnbukbuk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Spermacocce.sp.\
\\re fi:Spermacocce_sp.\
\\de kind of short herb with pompom inflorescence\
\\sc Spermacocce sp.\
\\sy an-kodjmornmorn\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx karndakidj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de male antilopine wallaroo\
\\sc Macropus antilopinus\
\\uv W= kolobbarr\
\\pdn kk = kalngunjkorrongko\
\\ee REM = karndayala\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\va karndalbburru\
\\ps n.\
\\ge antilopine\
\\re antilopine kangaroo (young female)\
\\re kangaroo sp., antilopine kangaroo (young female only)\
\\re fi:Macropus_antlopinus young female\
\\de Young female antilopine kangaroo. The adult female is fv:karndayh.\
\\sc Macropus antlopinus\
\\uv E, Kdj, Djnj\
\\sd mammals\
\\dt 17/Feb/2010\
\
\\lx karndawalk\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Erythrina_vespertilio\
\\de Bat\'92s wing coral tree; scraggly deciduous slender small tree to 8m high with scattered thorns along trunk and branches. The taproot of small plants no more than 50 cm high are cooked lightly on coals and eaten. As the plant becomes older the roots become too fibrous to eat. Has a taste similar to cassava. Lucas and Russell-Smith (1993 Vol.1, p.92) also record the names \'91an-ngarradban\'92 and \'91an-ngarrben\'92.\
\\sc Erythrina vespertilio\
\\sd plants\
\\uv Djnj, E, I\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Karndayh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Waridjngu clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\lit "female Antilopine kangaroo"\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx karndayh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de female antilopine wallaroo\
\\sc Macropus antilopinus\
\\pdn kk = ngalmarndamarndayi\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx karndirrikarl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de unidentified plant with edible tuber\
\\uv E.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karndirrikkarl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de tuber, with leaf\
\
\\lx karndubbu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear thrower\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde borndok.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx karndubbu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear thrower, 'woomera'.\
\\pde borndok.\
\
\\lx karndudj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de single walking stick\
\
\\lx karne\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spinifex\
\\re spinifex sp.\
\\re fi:Triodia_plectrachnoides\
\\de kind of small spinifex, small Triodia\
\\xv Mani an-karne anbu ka-yawdingihdi.\
\\xe This is the small fi:Triodia_plechtrechnoides, this small one here everywhere.\
\\ee Bininj identify two kinds of fi:Triodia_plechtrechnoides, a large and a small variety. fv:Anyokkorol is the large variety. The small\
variety is called fv:an-karne.\
\\sc Triodia plectrachnoides\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx karnhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make thin, make narrow eg. chopping the trunk of a tree\
\\xv Wanjh bene-rdehmeng bene-djal-rdehmeng bene-rdehmeng beneh-djal-yi-wam bene-yi-wam\
ngokokenh wanjh bene-karnhmeng yimarnek.\
\\xe Then they started to chop and chop and chop (to get themselves down).They kept going, as fast as they\
could until they had nearly cut through.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karning\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de two walking sticks, one each side\
\
\\lx karnkarn\
\\ps adj.\
\\de thin, skinny\
\\cf kukmo-karnkarn\
\\ce skinny body\
\
\\lx karnkelk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de leg\
\\pde kun-dad.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx karnkurlkkuno\
\\va an-karnkurlkku, man-karnkurlkku\
\\ge ridgeline\
\\re ridgeline of hills or rocky outcrops\
\\de ridgeline of hills or rocky outcrops or buttes\
\\xv Karnkurlkkuno, man-dulum ka-yirriyo.\
\\xe (What we call) fv:Karnkurlkkuno is a staight line of hills.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 22/Sep/2004\
\
\\lx karnma\
\\ps n.\
\\re large bandicoot\
\\re bandicoot\
\\de Northern brown bandicoot, large individual, small individuals are called fv:yok or fv:kobbol.\
\\xv Yok bad karnma duninj, na-kimuk.\
\\xe It's the same as fv:yok but much bigger.\
\\sc Isodon macrourus\
\\sd mammal\
\
\\lx Karnmalangkala\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Marlirri clan estate with a fresh-water spring\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karnubirr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge freshwater mussel\
\\re freshwater mussel\
\\de Freshwater mussel.\
\\sy kurruk\
\\uv Kdj, W, M.\
\\ur I, E= kurruk, W= balalah, karnubirr\
\\sd crustaceans/shellfish\
\\dt 02/Feb/2009\
\
\\lx kar\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de eel species\
\
\\lx Karadjdjarrngu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan associated with the Rembarrnga, Kune and Dangbon/Dalabon languages\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\\lx karak\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my fv:makka, your spouse, you are my same sex sibling.\
\\cn na-/ngal-karidnge.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kare\
\\ps interj.\
\\de maybe, perhaps 'I don't know' (said in a high falling tone).\
\\xv Na-kare. Wo, nani nawu mak kare.\
\\xe The same one as before. Yes, and this one also is perhaps the same as before.\
\
\\lx kare\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de same place\
\\xv Ku-kare karri-durndeng\
\\xe Let's go back to the same place.\
\\sn 2\
\\de in the same manner\
\\xv Nawu korroko birlmu birri-ngeybom dabborrabbolk. Birrih-ngeybom kaluk wanjh ku-kare ngarri-ngeybun.\
\\xe That's how the old people (ancestors) used to call barramundi. They called them that way and now today, we call them the same way.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kare\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps adv.\
\\de distant past\
\
\\lx kare\
\\pr + prefix\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps adj.\
\\ng takes a pronominal prefix but in third person singular will take a noun class prefix\
fv:na- or fv:ngal-\
\\mr\
\\sn 1\
\\ge adept\
\\re adept\
\\re experienced\
\\de able, experienced, one who knows what they are doing based on confidence from\
past experience\
\\de\
\\de\
\\xv Yi-bengkan yi-kan murrikang? Yo, nga-kare, na-dadjkewarre ngan-bukkang.\
\\xe Do you know how to drive? Yes, I'm an old hand, my father (who is your uncle)\
showed me.\
\\xv A: Yi-kare Kamarrang, yi-djalay! B: Larrk nga-warre!\
\\xe A: You are doing well Kamarrang, keep going! B: No, I'm no good!\
\\xv Bonj na-kare nungka, ka-marnbun.\
\\xe No worries, he's an old hand at it, he's succeeding.\
\\ee The term fv:yi-kare is usually said as a light-hearted compliment to someone\
engaged in the completion of a task or an activity requiring dexterity. The polite\
response is to be self-deprecating and deny that one is skilled or able.\
\\sn 2\
\\pr ku-\
\\ge same_place\
\\re same place as before\
\\de same place as before or as previously mentioned\
\\xv Birri-yawam kayakki. Bonj birri-wam birri-yawam birri-karuy yiman njale\
rey yimeninj bebmeninj birri-kadjuyi ba birri-yameninj kayakki\
djalngimeninj ku-rurrk ku-kare rerre. \
\\xe "Let's leave him" they said. They searched for him but found nothing. So they left\
and searched and dug in the hope of finding him, chasing him and spearing him but\
nothing, he just stayed inside in the same place.\
\\sn 3\
\\pr na-, (ng)al-, (m)an\
\\ps\
\\ge same_one\
\\re same as before, same as just previously mentioned\
\\de same one, same as just mentioned\
\\xv Na-kare ka-rrurrkmirri ngudberre.\
\\xe The same man (as before) will work for you.\
\\xv Mani man-kare rerre manu nga-djalngeybom bolkkime.\
\\xe This (tree) is the same one as that which I just named just now.\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv\
\\ur\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kare\
\\pr kun-, (m)an-, na-\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps temp. noun\
\\mr\
\\sn 1\
\\ge long_ago\
\\re long ago\
\\re before\
\\re distant past\
\\de a long time ago, in the past, many years ago\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv\
\\xe\
\\sn 2\
\\ge long_time\
\\re long period of time\
\\de long period of time\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv I,W=kun-kare, Djnj, Kdj= an-kare, E= na-kare\
\\ur\
\\dt 21/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kare\
\\pref\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps adv. pref.\
\\mr\
\\sn 1\
\\ge be_on_ground\
\\re be on the ground\
\\de make close physical contact with the ground\
\\xv Bi-bom bi-karekurrmeng.\
\\xe He hit him and knocked him down.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge copulate\
\\re laying down involved in sexual activity\
\\xv Daluk bi-warrewong bi-karekurrmeng, bene-kareyoy.\
\\xe He did the wrong thing to that woman and lay her on the ground and they slept together.\
\\xv Duruk kabene-kare-di.\
\\xe The two dogs are copulating.\
\\so Kuninjku\
\\dt 21/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx karemen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become old\
\\xv Bonj, na-warre, kareminj.\
\\xe Leave it, it's no good, it's too old.\
\
\\lx karidnge\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my spouse, your fv:makka, we are same sex siblings.\
\\cn na-/ngal-karak.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karonhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de look back, look behind\
\\xv Ka-rrolkkan ka-re ka-nidberren ka-karonhme.\
\\xe He gets up and goes, stops and looks back (song text from fv:wurrurrumi song series).\
\
\\lx Karorrelurlhdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\uc0\u8232 \\de A jungle thicket in the upper reaches of Mandedjkadjang Creek (Muralidbar Creek). Significant as a flying fox hunting place. Karorrelurlhdi is around 2km southeast of Demed Hill. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx karung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de dig\
\\xv Ngarri-karung manekke man-yawok yekkekeno.\
\\xe We dig that cheeky yam in the dry season.\
\\pdn kk = lurribme\
\
\\lx Karrabalinja\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Large rock shelter within a sandstone outlier most probably in the Kabulurr area of Birrirddak Creek. There are many paintings in the shelter, including contact art pieces. One such piece is a horse\'92s head complete with reins, said to have been painted by Paddy Cahill\'92s head stockman, Quilp.\
\\cf Kabulurr\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Karrabbu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Entrance Island, in Ndj\'c8bbana language called fv:Kabalko. The island was visited by the fv:Na-korrkko\
ancestors. water and when the toxin is all gone we get it out.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karrabbulyu\
\\ps n.\
\\de large specimens of saltwater catfish\
\
\\lx karrabolko\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de adults\
\\sn 2\
\\de elders, elderly\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dabborrabbolk.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx karrabolko\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de old people\
\\pde dabborrabbolk\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Karrabudorddordi\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx karrakbal\
\\ps n.\
\\re moon\
\\de Moon\
\
\\lx karramalk\
\\ps n.\
\\re stone axe\
\\de Stone axe with hafted wooden handle.\
\\xv Ngaleng kanbukkang yehyeng rowk kahbimdi karramalk kunbarlkbu kundjakkorl ngalmangiyi dja kalawan nawu karrihngun namak mayh nadjalwern.\
\\xe She [Yingarna] established and taught Aboriginal people about all aspects of our culture such as the use of axes, fire drills and edible animals such as long-necked turtles, goannas and all kinds of good edible foods.\
\\sy dadken\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 03/Oct/2014\
\
\\lx karrambun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hold a hand over one's eyes to shade from the sun/light\
\
\\lx karrang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de mother (vocative)\
\
\\lx karrahbonj\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge oh dear\
\\re interjection used to express resignation\
\\de Interjection used by children, young men and young women (not older adults) to express resignation. 'whatever', 'please yourself'.\
\\xv A: Ngarre ngarrwurlebme. B: Nga-warnyak nga-ngudjwarre. A: Karrabonj\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx karrangburlurlhme\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mangrove.monitor\
\\re mangrove monitor\
\\re fi:Varanus_indicus\
\\de Mangrove monitor.\
\\sc Veranus indicus\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 03/Mar/2014\
\
\\lx karrard\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my mother your daughter. Also, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka,\
speaker calls referent mother, hearer calls referent fv:ngal-kurrng or 'cousin'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karrard\
\\va karrang (voc.)\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de mother, M\
\
\\lx karrarla\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de white ibis\
\\sc Threskiornis aethiopicus\
\
\\lx karrarndalk\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spinifex sp.\
\\re spinifex (fi:Triodia_microstachia )\
\\re fi:Triodia_microstachia\
\\de kind of rock country spinifex , 'kerosene grass'\
\\xv Nga-yolyolme bu nungan nuye an-me ka-ngun an-karrarndalk, an-karrarndjalhkarrarndjalh ka-ngun ka-rohrok yiman\
ka-yime nabarlek, ka-rohrok ka-ngun.\
\\xe I'll tell you about its food [the black wallaroo], they eat spinifex (Triodia microstachia ) and another variety of this grass called\
fv:an-karrarndjalhkarrarndjalh (fi:Triodia_sp.) which is also the same food eaten by nabarlek rock kangaroos.\
\\xv Nungka barrk yika ka-yo kure mi-karrarndalk dja mi-ngarre.\
\\xe Sometimes black wallaroos sleep in the spinifex and in thickets.\
\\xv Man-karrarndalk ka-karrme koyhno, ka-wurlhme yiman fi:petrol.\
\\xe Kerosene grass has a resin and burns like petrol.\
\\un  fv:man-karrarndalk_man-ngarrewern 'a thicket of fi:Triodia_microstachia'.\
\\sc Triodia microstachia\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj, I, E, W, Kdj\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx karrarndjalhkarrarndjalh\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spinifex.sp.\
\\re fi:Triodia_sp.\
\\re Triodia grass sp.\
\\de kind of rock country spinifex\
\\xv An-karrarndjalhkarrarndjalh yekkeken dalukorro ka-ngun barrk, balemno kalno ka-marnburren.\
\\xe In the cool dry season when the south-east winds blow, the black wallaroo eats the triodia grass and it increases\
their fat and bone marrow.\
\\sc Triodia sp.?\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sy an-bodjub\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 30/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx karrawukka\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de red and black abrus seed plant\
\\sc Abrus precatorius\
\\ee seeds poisonous if swallowed\
\\ee W, REM fv:karrawukka 'Flagellaria indica'\
\\sy kirriwukkirriwuk\
\\sn 2\
\\re bangle vine\
\\de Bangle vine; slender vigorous climber with cane like stems, supported by coiled leaf tip tendrils, used for making armbands and sewing together the ends of bark canoes.\
\\sc Flagellaria indica\
\\sy an-rong, karrawukka\
\\uv Kdj, W\
\\ur I= man-barddedde, Djnj= barddedde\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx karrbarda\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de long yam\
\\sc Dioscorea transversa\
\\ee cooked and eaten\
\\sy kayawal\
\\xv Karrbarda ngarri-wilkdeng wanjh ngarri-ngun.\
\\xe We cook the long yam in the ashes and then eaten.\
\\pdn man-karremudyi.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Name of a fv:kun-borrk song series sung by Bruce and Barndanj Nabegeyo from Kunbarlanja.\
\\xv Bolkki kabirri-borrkke karrbarda.\
\\xe They'll dance 'yam style' dances today.\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx karrbirlk\
\\va karrbilk\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Merremia_sp.\
\\re vine with edible tuber\
\\re fi:Merremia_sp.\
\\de a creeping vine found in sandstone habitats with attractive pink flowers and an edible tuber\
\\sc Merremia sp.\
\\xv Karrbirlk malaworrno yiman 'sweet potato'.\
\\xe The leaves of the Merremia sp. are like those of sweet potato.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Ipomoea.spp\
\\re fi:Ipomoea_gracilis.\
\\de kind of trailing vine, with named small and large leaf varieties.\
\\xv Kalawan mayawo an-worryahwurd, karrbilk an-worrbalabala.\
\\xe fv:Kalawan_mayawo is the small leafed variety and fv:karrbirlk has wide leaves.\
\\sc Ipomea gracilis\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karre\
\\pr kun-\
\\va karreno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de leg below knee\
\
\\lx karre\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n. incorporable\
\\sn 1\
\\de custom, manner\
\\sc Kunibidji minj kabindi-berd-dadjdje, man-karre bedberre.\
\\xe The Kunibidji do not practice circumcision. It is their custom.\
\\sn 2\
\\de culture, law\
\\sn 3\
\\de ceremony, song\
\\xv Ka-karrerawon.\
\\xe He will participate in his second ceremony (lit: 3s.+ceremony+add on).\
\\sn 4\
\\de message, news.\
\\pdn kk = kun-darok\
\\cf kun-dulkarre\
\\ce power\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx Karredjalkdjalk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre-Kubumi estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx karremang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge sing.song\
\\re sing song\
\\de Sing song, recite sacred verse\
\\xv Ankung, namekke. Bobbidj, nadjamun kunngey ka-karrme. Andi-marnekarremangi korroko. \
\\xe Honey, that one. fi:Tetragonula honey, it has a sacred name. They used to sing it [its sacred song] for me long ago.\
\\dt 10/Oct/2010\
\
\\lx karrebbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de search for\
\\xv Oh arri-kuyinkarrebbun ka-mirrhdi |fs\{maitbi jirri or four\}.\
\\xe Just as we are about to start searching for him, there they are with their sharp end [hornets] maybe three or four of them.\
\\sy yawan.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karrekadjung\
\
\\lx karrebakke\
\
\\lx karrek\
\\ps n.\
\\de Goanna species, possibly black-headed monitor.\
\\sc Veranus tristis\
\\uv E\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\nt needs checking, as what is darrarra?\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karrekbodme\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de unidentified grass species, used in construction of fence fish traps.\
\\xv Kunkolewobe kabirri-marnbun mak man-karrekbodme kabirri-mang kabirri-balhme.\
\\xe When they make fence fish traps they get fv:man-karrekbodme grass to use as blocking (at the base of the trap).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karrekobbam\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de calf of leg\
\\uv W= kun-yonkobbam.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karrekudji\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de one ceremony\
\\xv Kulawuddul nungka, man-karre-kudji ka-karrme.\
\\xe He is a novice, he has been through one ceremony.\
\
\\lx karrekuyengkuyeng\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lily.trotter\
\\re Comb-crested jacana\
\\re Lily trotter\
\\re fi:Irediparra_gallinacea\
\\de Comb crested jacana (also called lily-trotter or Jesus bird); walks on floating plants. Associated with fv:yirridjdja moiety and the fv:yabbarrurruwa ceremony.\
\\sc Irediparra gallinacea\
\\sy karrekuyengkuyeng\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= mandjorlok-mandjorlok, Kdj= dakarrekuyengkuyeng\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx karremudyi\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\lit "hairy leg"\
\\de Long Yam\
\\sc Dioscorea transversa\
\\pde karrbarda\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx karremulewan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge pay.fine\
\\re pay a fine or penalty\
\\de pay a fine or some kind of penalty\
\\xv Bininj nawu muddika ka-kan dja bininj mak kabirri-barndi kore mankodjlarrk wanjh kabirri-karremulewan\
kun-wardde bu djamun kaben-nan. \
\\xe The driver and passengers can be fined if they travel in the back of a truck and are caught by the police.\
\\uv W\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx karremurrngno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de shin bone (bone of leg below knee)\
\
\\lx karre-rawon\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de go through a second ceremony\
\\xv Nga-karre-rawong.\
\\xe I've been through two ceremonies.\
\\uv Dj,Kun-dedjnjenghmi= bakarribokenhbe.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karrewernwon\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de go through many ceremonies\
\\xv Na-kare nungka karrewernwong.\
\\xe He is experienced [previously initiated], he's been through many ceremonies.\
\\xv Kidjdjarn, minj ngurri-ngun. Bu ngurri-karrewernwon bonj ka-mak\
ngurri-ngun wanjh.\
\\xe You can't it that food, it is taboo. Once you have attended a number of ceremonies,\
you will then be allowed to eat it.\
\\dt 11/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx karrewoneng\
\\ps poss.pron.\
\\de us (you 2 and me), ours (we three)\
\
\\lx karrhkirala\
\\va karrhkiyala\
\\ps n.\
\\ge burdekin.duck\
\\re Burdekin duck\
\\re fi:Tadorna_radjah\
\\re Radjah shelduck\
\\de Burdekin duck, also known as Radjah shelduck.\
\\sc Tadorna radjah\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= kambarrikambarri, Kdj= nangarralbak\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx karri\
\\va karrikad\
\\ph\
\\ps spatial adverb\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge west\
\\re west\
\\de west, north-west\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Koyek ka-berrengol, kakbi ka-berrengol, karri ka-berrengol, walem\
ka-berrengol kumardidjdja kumaburdub kumardidjdja kumaburdub.\
\\xe [words to a children's fv:morrdjdjanjno song about the goanna fi:Varanus_panoptes]\
It looks to the east for clouds, it looks to the north for clouds, it looks to the west for\
clouds, it looks to the south for clouds, kumardidjdja kumaburdub kumardidjdja\
kumaburdub [song words].\
\\ee The etymology of this word is related to fv:karrkad 'on top/ up on the plateau above'\
and may suggest a proto-homeland for Bininj Kun-wok to the east of the Arnhem\
Land plateau.\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy karrikad, yakarriwi\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv W, I, Djnj, E\
\\ur\
\\dt 11/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx karri-\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge 1pl\
\\re first person plural inclusive pronominal prefix\
\\de first person plural inclusive pronominal prefix (i.e. you me and at least two others are\
the participants)\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng 1,2 augmented\
\\xv\
\\xe\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv\
\\ur\
\\dt 11/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx karridjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de paddle a boat with an oar or paddle\
\\sn 2\
\\de swim by means of fins or a fish tail\
\
\\lx karrihkarri\
\\ps loc\
\\de very long distance to the west\
\\sy karrikad djarre\
\
\\lx karrikad\
\\ps loc.\
\\sn 1\
\\de west\
\\sn 2\
\\de used by people to the east of the Arnhem Land plateau to refer to the direction of the plateau which\
may be west or north-west\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karrimen\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'oops I'm just joking', used at the end of a phrase or sentence as a kind of marker for humour or ' I don't really mean it I'm just joking'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karrkad\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de higher ground, at the top, above the escarpment\
\\an kanjdji-kanjdji\
\
\\lx karrkkanj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de brown falcon\
\\sc Falco berigora\
\\ee yirridjdja/lorrkkon\
\\ee The dark morph is considered fv:Bulanj subsection and is called fv:wunwunbu, the light morph is fv:kodjok subsection and is called fv:kanmilanmila. The brown falcon is an important fv:yirridjdja totem for men of fv:Bulanj and fv:Kodjok subsections in the fv:lorrkkon hollow log ceremony.\
\\xv Ka-kukbame kanmilanmila kodjok, ngudda kurduk bulanj wunwunbu.\
\\xe The light morph of the brown falcon is called fv:kanmilanmila but you Bulanj are the dark morph fv:wunwunbu.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx karrkini\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge contain.component\
\\re contain a solute or substance component\
\\de Contain a substance as a solute or minor solid component within in a major substance component.\
\\xv Kanjdji kore ku-rorre kore kamh-bobebme pipe-beh, wanjh kabirri-wabwabke kukku dja uranium manu kah-karrkini ka-bore kore man-labbarl, wanjh ka-marnburren ka-bangmen wanjh kabirri-bebke uranium.\
\\xe  Underneath the ground there is a pipe where the water comes out and then they move the water with the dissolved uranium which flows into a [process water] pond and then the solution is concentrated and they remove [precipitate] the uranium.\
\\dt 27/Feb2010\
\
\\lx karrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de have, own, possess\
\\xv Bulanj dilib yi-karrme?\
\\xe Bulanj do you have any tea leaf?\
\\xv Namekke, yo djang ka-rri bolkki kumekke ka-rri djang. Ka-karrme wayuk yo, Kudjarnngal.\
\\xe That's the one yes, there's a sacred site there today. It has water lillies there at Kudjarnngal.\
\\xv Ngandi-marneyimeng kun-red manih nguddangke bu yiman baleh ngarri-dowen wanjh nguddangke kun-red yi-worhnan. Ya yi-karrme. Ya ngurri-karrme kunekke yerre birri-marneyimeng Wamud nungka nga-kerrngedi wanjh fi:young yimeyimeng. \
\\xe They said to me that this place belongs to me and that "when we should die, then you have to look after this place. You will own it. You all hold onto it after," they said to Wamud and I was one of the new generation and Wamud was young.\
\\sn 2\
\\de keep\
\\xv Birri-ngeybom wanjh ngarri-ngey-bekkang. Wanjh ngarri-ngey-karrme kun-ngey nuye.\
\\xe They said the names and we heard them and so now we keep the names for it.\
\\sn 3\
\\de hold on to\
\\xv "Kokok, Kokok yi-karrme?" "Woh, nga-karrme, nga-karrme, la yi-ray." Wam, wam,\
yurruburdihmeng. Kam-durndi, bi-djawam "Kokok, yi-karrme?"\
\\xe Brother, brother Are you holding on to it? Yes I've got it, I've got it, you go then. He went running off.\
He came back and asked him "Brother have you got it?"\
\\sn 4\
\\ge touch\
\\re touch\
\\de touch\
\\sn 5\
\\ge have.offspring\
\\re have offspring, have children\
\\de (man) have a child\
\\xv Yi-bengkan Kodjok? Bale nakka kah-ngey-yo? Bulanj bi-karrmeng.\
\\xe You know that Kodjok? What's his name now? He has a son\'97 Bulanj.\
\\pdn kk = monhme.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx karrng\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my daughter, your mother. Also, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka,\
speaker calls referent son-in-law fv:na-kurrng, hearer calls referent uncle fv:ngadjadj. 2. My son, your\
uncle, you are my daughter's son ie. fv:kakkak.\
\\cn na-rroyngu.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karrng\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd tri-relational kin term\
\\de Tri-relational kinship term (kun-derbi, kun-debi, kun-derbuy), altercentric class of mother/mother\'92s brother (i.e 'your mother'). The root fv:\'96karrng is most likely related to the ordinary kin term fv:karrang \'91mother!\'92 derived from an historical loss of second syllable vowels between \'91rr\'92 and \'91ng\'92. e.g. speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent\
mother-in-law (fv:ngal-kurrng or 'cousin'), hearer calls referent mother. 2. Your mother, my daughter,\
we call each other fv:kakkak.\
\\cn ngal-doyngu.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karrngbakmeng\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de four\
\
\\lx karrngburrk\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent male\
'cousin' or fv:na-kurrng, hearer calls referent uncle or fv:ngadjadj.\
\\cn na-ngadjkewarre\
\\sn 2\
\\de Speaker and hearer call each other fv:kanjok, speaker calls referent 'father', and hearer calls 'uncle',\
speaker says na-karrngburrk and hearer reciprocates with fv:na-dedjnawarre.3. my father , your uncle,\
you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn na-ngadjkewarre (check fv:na-dadjkewarre?).\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx karrngburrk\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, 1.speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent mother-in-law\
or fv:ngal-kurrng, hearer calls referent mother\
\\cn ngal-ngadjkewarre\
\\sn 2\
\\de Speaker and referent call each other fv:kanjok. Speaker calls referent 'mother' and hearer calls 'aunty'.\
Speaker refers as fv:ngal-karrngburrk and hearer reciprocates with fv:ngal-dedjnawarre\
\\sn 3\
\\de My aunty, your mother, we call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn ngal-ngadjkewarre.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kawadj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de sand\
\\uv I\
\\uv W= kun-kayalanj\
\\cf kukawadj\
\\ce in the sand\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kawalbadjamdi\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx kawang\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge scurvy.grass\
\\re scurvy grass\
\\re fi:Commelina_ensifolia\
\\de Many-stemmed prostrate or semi-prostrate herb to 30 cm high, producing roots at the stem nodes, stems are longitudinally ribbed and covered in pale hairs. The leaves are grass-like, semi-fleshy and clothed in pale hairs, with lanceolate blades 45-100 long x 8-30 mm wide, base sheathing the stem. Flowers are blue with 3 petals of unequal size and distinct yellow anthers, approximately 20 mm diameter.\
\\sc Commelina ensifolia\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\ur Kdj= an-bidkalkberd\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Aneilema.siliculosum\
\\re fi:Aneilema_siliculosum\
\\de small herb from rock country with small edible tuber\
\\xv Ngarri-djalkadjung ngarri-karung dedjwayh ngarri-kan ya. Ngalengman karrbarda. Yiman ngali ngalengman mak ngarri-karuhkarung. Man-ngalinj en man-kawang, man-kawang man-djudjulng. Kunekke ka-dedjmaddi mankawang.\
\\xe We just keep digging away until out it comes, we lift it up and take it. That's the long yam. Like this one too we dig them up. Also other small bush tubers like fi:Ipomoea_sp. and fi:Aneilema_siliculosum which have little small tubers. The roots are like this [draws a picture of it],\
and this, it's small.\
\\so Mick Kubarkku\
\\sc Aneilema siliculosum\
\\uv Kdj, I\
\\ur Djnj= an-bidkawang\
\\sn 3\
\\ge Murdannia.gigantea \
\\re fi:Murdannia_gigantea\
\\de small perennial herbaceous plant\
\\sc Murdannia gigantea\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kawidjdji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de This is a small tributary of Mankorlod creek which is crossed by the Mankorlod to\
Manmoyi/Yikarrakkal road. It is a wide open area of flat rock visited for fishing and swimming. It is in\
fv:na-kurulk clan estate.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kawk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge night.heron\
\\re rufous night heron\
\\re fi:Nycticorax_caledonicus\
\\de Rufous Night Heron\
\\xv Awurd, mayh namekke ngan-kodjborledke Kawk Kabim Djang\
\\xe So dear to me is that bird, its call reminds me of the rufous night heron dreaming at Kawk Kabim (a place).\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= durukmud, E= karkkarawk\
\\sc Nycticorax caledonicus\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx Kawk Kabim\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kawkbidbom\
\\lit Rufous Night Heron (bird sp.) climbed up'.\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in Kakodbebuldi estate.\
\
\\lx kawolk\
\\va kawolh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de silver-crowned friar bird\
\\sc fi:Philemon_argenticeps\
\\ee The name fv:kawolk can sometimes be used to refer to all the larger friarbirds (and possibly some honey eaters), notably those with a patch of bare skin around each eye. Other small honey eaters (and the little friar bird, fi:Philemon_citreogularis) are called fv:wik-wik. More knowledgeable speakers refer to the helmeted friarbird fi:Philemon_buceroides as fv:kabukkawa.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kawolkkawolk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de small grass sp., up to half a metre high and very fine stems.\
\\xv Manekke man-kawolkkawolk wurdurd kabirri-mang kabirri-danjbun burrkel wanjh\
kabirri-burriwe a-borledborledme yiman 'helicopter'.\
\\xe This grass children get it and spear march flies with it, throw them up and they spin around like a\
helicopter.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kawon\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de animal running away in fright eg. upon hearing or seeing a hunter coming\
\\xv Nga-nang karndakidj ningihni, ningihni, ngah-kunewabmeng wanjh ngan-nang kawong,\
kun-marrwe nga-rrurndi.\
\\xe I saw an Antilopine Kangaroo sitting there. He kept sitting and I moved up on him, but then he saw me\
and jumped off in fright and I went back hungry.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kawulkkiwulkki\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Aristida.holathera\
\\re fi:Aristida_holathera (grass)\
\\de kind of perennial grass\
\\sc Aristida holathera\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kayakki\
\\ps interj.\
\\de nothing, none, no\
\\uv W= burrkyak\
\\pdn kk = kayakora\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kayakora\
\\ps interj.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de nothing, none, no\
\\pde kayakki\
\\ee Burarra fv:gunyagora 'no, nothing'.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kayalak\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\de bat species\
\\pdn kk = djingkorrk\
\
\\lx kayawal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de long yam\
\\xv Kayawal yerri ani ngarri-yimi ngarri-kebmudyawani ngarri-kebmudngalkeyi. Ngarri-djalkebmudkadjungi ngarri-nani ka-kodj.\
\\xe It\'92s the same with long yams [D. transversa], we follow the fine roots that come out of them until we locate the tuber.\
\\sc Dioscorea transversa\
\\uv E,W but these two dialects also use fv:karrbarda\
\\uv I= karrbarda\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kayawal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de long yam\
\\sc Dioscorea transversa\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv W, I, E= karrbarda\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kaybun\
\\ps v.ditr.\
\\de Withhold from, refuse to give something to someone, deny someone something\
\\xv "Aa ngalkkan ngurri-bawo, ngalkkan ngurri-bawo. Minj ngalkka ngurri-won kunj,\
karri-kaybun ngalengmanwali wardi kan-kaybun man-me man-djay". "Yoh yoh bonj bonj\
karri-kaybun, karri-kaybun baw."\
\\xe "Ah, leave her, leave her. Don't give her any kangaroo. Now it's our turn not to give her because she won't give us any of the hypoxis grass". "Yeah, yeah, OK right, let's not give her any, let's not give her, quiet!"\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kayerrngwe\
\\va Karerrngwe\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de This site is a section of the so-called \'91Gumardir\'92 branch of the \'91Goomadeer\'92 River with flat rocky banks. It is located at the confluence of these two rivers. It is a firewood djang (Dreaming site), and firewood which has been placed by the flow of the river in the wet season cannot be taken from the margins of the river otherwise a tempest or other dangerous outcomes would result. Ka-yerrng-we means literally \'91it/(s)he-firewood-throws\'92. The alternative pronunciation is Karerrngwe, which reflects dialect difference in pronunciation of the word for firewood: fv:kunyerrng or fv:kunrerrng.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kayhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de call out, yell\
\
\\lx kayhmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go along calling out.\
\\xv Wularla ka-kayhmire ka-yime kaaaay, kunekke.\
\\xe The Spectacled hare wallaby goes along calling out, it says, 'kaaaay' like that.\
\
\\lx kayimarri\
\\ps n.\
\\ge eagle\
\\re fi:Aquila_audax\
\\re wedge-tailed eagle\
\\de Wedge-tailed eagle.\
\\sc Aquila audax\
\\uv W, Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= namaddol, I= milarrhwaken\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kayimarri Kayedno\
\\va Kayimarri Karedno\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx ke\
\\ps interj.\
\\de Is that so? (Said with falling tone).\
\
\\lx ke\
\\va ngudda ke\
\\ps poss. pron.\
\\de yours\
\\xv Kun-madj ke.\
\\xe Your swag/clothes.\
\
\\lx ke na-kurrngh/ke ngal-kurrngh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my child, your cousin ie.fv:na-kurrng/ngal-kurrng, we are same sex siblings\
\\cn same\
\\sy na-/ngal-kewurd.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ke ngadjadj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg., My brother, your uncle, you are my nephew\
\\cn na-djumu.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx keb\
\\pr kun\
\\va kebno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable\
\\sn 1\
\\ge nose\
\\re nose\
\\de nose\
\\xv Kebbinjbinj nungkah.\
\\xe He has a long/narrow nose.\
\\xv Birri-wurlhkemeninj birri-buyi kalawan, ngamed birri-nayi ka-bebmeninj birri-buyi yok, birri-buyi. Birri-nayi midjno birri-buyi, midjno kah-midjdi. Bu ka-kebdarrhme. Ka-berd-darrhme. Karri-rrorrorrke karri-djambarrhmang.\
\\xe They\'92d light fires and kill goannas flushed out or bandicoots. They\'92d see them poking out of their burrows where they had their burrows. If the nose was poking out. Or the tail sticking out. We\'92d drag them out and swing them down onto the ground to kill them.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge face\
\\re face\
\\de face\
\\xv Kabene-kebrohrok.\
\\xe Those two have the same face.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge beak (of bird)\
\\re beak (of bird)\
\\de beak (of a bird)\
\\xv Mibbarr nungkah ka-bun, nawu dabbuno, ka-barrhke ku-kebyih.\
\\xe The white-bellied sea-eagle breaks open the [emu] egg with its beak.\
\\sn 4\
\\ge bow.of.boat\
\\re bow (of boat)\
\\re grill (of a car, front of a car)\
\\de bow of boat or front grill of a car\
\\xv Maneh muddika yi-bimbu! fi:'Side_way' yi-kukbimbu! \'85 yi-kebkuyengka!\
\\xe Draw a picture of that car! Draw it side on ... make the front of it longer!\
\\sn 5\
\\ge hook\
\\re hook (fishing)\
\\de fishing hook\
\\xv Yi-kebkarrme?\
\\xe Have you got a hook?\
\\sy nginjno\
\\sn 6\
\\ge peg.of.woomera\
\\re spearthrower peg\
\\re peg of spearthrower\
\\de peg on the distal end of a spearthrower which is inserted into the end of a spear\
\\sn 7\
\\ge hive.entrance\
\\re entrance to honey hive\
\\de external entrance tunnel or tube to a native bee hive\
\\sy badjno, ngalkno\
\\sn 8\
\\ge burning.wood\
\\re burning log\
\\de end of a burning log, stick or other fuel\
\\xv Yi-kebmarnbu ngarduk.\
\\xe Fix up the fire for me (i.e. rearrange the logs to stoke it).\
\\xv Yolyolmeng yimeng konda kabirri-dulubun kurradkurlba dja kabirri-kebdjuhke kunak manekke. Manih kurlba kabirri-djuhke.\
\\xe He told us the story of how they pierce a vein in the buttocks or top of leg and they throw the blood on to that [geothermal] fire. They splash it with blood.\
\\pdn kk = kun-ngandjak, kun-modjarrk\
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx kebbabi\
\\ps adj.\
\\de annoyingly persistent\
\\xv Nga-kohbanjminj bolkkime. Darnki nga-rrowen bad Balanda nungan kebbabi.\
\\xe I've got old today and I could die soon but those white people are still being persistent (and coming to see me, making requests).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kebbakke\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de change direction of travel, turn off\
\\xv Mimarn, walem karri-re walem walem karri-kebbakme karrikad.\
\\xe From Mimarn we fo south and then turn to the west.\
\
\\lx kebbaldjurri\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spoonbill\
\\re spoonbill\
\\de Spoonbill.\
\\xv Kebbaldjurri ka-yawan nuye djenj kore ku-buk nawu djenj kilekilelh ka-ngun barnangarra dja kukak.\
\\xe The spoonbill looks for his fish in the shallow water, those small fish which he eats day and night.\
\\sc Platalea flavipes, Platalea regia\
\\uv W, Djnj\
\\ur I, E= muluymuluy\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 27/Mar/2014\
\
\\lx kebberber\
\\ps adj.\
\\de broad-nosed\
\\xv Yoh, kabene-kebrohrok kornkumo nuye ka-keb-berber nungka.\
\\xe Yes, he's got the same face as his father, he's broad-nosed.\
\
\\lx kebbirdidurrkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make someone act, cause someone to do something, encourage to act\
\\xv Wardi yi-djawa nakka yi-kebbirdidurrkma ba ka-rrolkkan karri-re.\
\\xe Well try and ask him, get him to get up and come so we can all go.\
\
\\lx kebbirdidjrayek\
\\va kebbirdirayek\
\\ps adj.\
\\de hard-nosed, recalcitrant\
\\xv Nganenghmerrinj marrek ka-djare kam-re na-kebbirdidjrayek. Karri-bawo kondanj ka-rri.\
\\xe He pulled himself away he doesn't want to come, he's grumpy [and doesn't want to do anything].\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kebbirdidjwern\
\\va kebbirdiwern\
\\ps adj.\
\\de teaser, someone who teases all the time\
\
\\lx kebbirdidjwernmen\
\\va kebbirdiwernmen\
\\ps v.i\
\\de to tease constantly\
\\xv Wurdurd yun ngurri-kebbirdidjwernmen wardi ngundi-bun ngdberre birri-buyika.\
\\xe You kids, don't tease all the time otherwise that other mob might come and belt you.\
\
\\lx kebbongdong\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de two objects come firmly together against each other, eg. a truck push starting another truck, a scrum in football or an ancher rope tied firmly and holding the bow of a boat.\
\\xv Kamak kan-kebbongdong kan-djirrkkan murrikang ka-wurrme.\
\\xe Is it OK if you bring your truck up to mine and push it so it can start?\
\\xv fv:Football kabirri-dirri kabirri-kebbongdorren.\
\\xe When they play football they come up against each other (in a scrum).\
\\xv Bene-keb-bongdorrinj.\
\\xe They crashed into the front of each other.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kebborlh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge nose.peg\
\\re nose peg\
\\de nose peg (wooden) or ring (pandanus fibre) placed through a pierced nasal septum as a form of bodily adornment\
\\sd material_culture\
\
\\lx kebbume\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de sulk, be silently angry, not talking to anyone 'sad face' 2. 'poke one's nose up' at something.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kebdubberranj\
\\ps check\
\\de blocked nose\
\\xv Bu karri-keb-dubberranj karri-yime "Kaluk marne-bebme ke".\
\\xe When we have a blocked nose, we say "I'll come for you soon". (because of the folk belief that a\
blocked nose is caused by a girlfriend/boyfriend talking about you).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kebdjamud\
\\va kebdjamudno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge antennae\
\\re antennae (of insects)\
\\de antennae of insects or crustaceans\
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx kebdjened\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de nasal mucus\
\\cf as a verb, fv:-kebdjened means to have a head cold.\
\\xv Nga-kebdjened nga-rrowen.\
\\xe I've got a head cold/flu.\
\
\\lx kebkale\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge point\
\\re point (geography)\
\\de ridge line, point along escarpment line, escarpment protrusion, coastal point, banks of river\
\\sd geographic\
\
\\lx kebkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge take.dogs.hunting\
\\re take dogs hunting\
\\de Take dogs hunting.\
\\xv \\xv Nga-kebkan mayh kure Barlbbanarra wanjh Barlbbanarra kang duruk, duruk kang djalbom mayh...\
\\xe 'I'm taking the dogs hunting to Barlbbanarra', and so he took the dogs to Barlbbanarra and killed lots of game...\
\\dt 14/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx kebkuk\
\\ps n.\
\\de liar\
\\xv Yi-kebkuk.\
\\xe You're a liar.\
\
\\lx kebkurlba\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n. (idiom)\
\\de The obligation to perform a ceremony as part of the mortuary ritual sequence for a deceased person\
(usually a number of years later). For example, a senior land owner of Yirridjdja moiety died on his\
country and his duwa 'djungkay' then may decide to perform a Yabburdurrwa at this Yirridjdja location.\
\\nt check, text needed.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kebmak\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ge good.looking\
\\re good looking\
\\re handsome\
\\re pretty\
\\re attractive\
\\de Good-looking, attractive, handsome, pretty.\
\\dt 27/Jan/2012\
\
\\lx kebmarnbun\
\\v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge make.spearthrower\
\\re make a spearthrower\
\\de make a spearthrower\
\\ng metonymic expression based on the fv:gun-geb 'spearthrower peg' at the distal end of a spearthrower\
\\xv Balanda nakka bidwern, kodjkulubuyika, kodjkurluwern, nomo ngad bininj ngarri-kodjkurlukudji, one way matibi nga-yime borndok nga-kebmarnbun o nga-dukkan kurlbburru.\
\\xe Europeans are industrious and have a different way of thinking with many ideas, but not like we Aboriginal people who are conservative such as doing things one way such as when I make a spear-thrower or haft an axe.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge rearrange logs\
\\re rearrange logs\
\\de Rearrange wood fuel in a fire, stoke fire by rearranging burning logs.\
\\dt 27/Jan/2012\
\
\\lx kebmarninj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de boomerang, number seven shape\
\
\cf2 \\lx kebmawahme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re have descendants\
\\de Have descendents, be patrilineal progenitor.\
\\xv Benkebmawahmeng.\
\\xe \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
He had descendants.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\id DK\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx kebmurrngno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de bridge of nose\
\
\\lx kebngun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge drown.OBJ\
\\re drown someone\
\\de drown someone\
\\xv Bu ga-dadjdjihme yi-na, kukku ka-bobidbun. Ka-bobidbun wanjh kan-kebngun gondah.\
\\xe If they interfere, look here, the water will rise up. The water will rise up and drown us here.\
\\dt 13/Apr/2011\
\
\\lx kebno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge nose\
\\re nose\
\\de variant of fv:kun-keb, nose\
\
\\lx kebrurrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kebrurrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge nostril\
\\re nostril\
\\re nasal cavity\
\\de nostril, nasal cavity\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 27/Jan/2012\
\
\\lx kebrurrkkarren\
\\ps v.recip.\
\\ge cause.each.other.to.stay\
\\re cause each other to stay put\
\\de cause each other to stay in one place\
\\xv Ka-djale ngalengman yika marrek kabani-kebrurrkkarren manekke mayh nawu yika ka-djale kamak rowk.\
\\xe She [emu] keeps on the move, they don't stop to stay in one place, she likes best to keep moving.\
\\edit meaning needs checking\
\\dt 27/Jan/2012\
\
\\lx kebun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sleep\
\\uv W\
\\uv I=kodjdjeyo\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kebwarre\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge poor.firewood\
\\re firewood not good for burning\
\\de wood considered unsuitable as firewood, wood that doesn't burn well\
\\xv Man-buyika karri-yerrngmang, bu garri-worrhme, mahni man-gebwarre.\
\\xe Let's get other firewood to make a fire, this wood is no good for burning.\
\\dt 27/Jan/2012\
\
\\lx kedderrekedderre\
\\ps interj.\
\\re clan lect for Bolmo (Dordokkiyu)\
\\de Clan lect interjection or fv:kundangwok used by the Bolmo clan (Dordokiyu lineage i.e. upper East Alligator River).\
\\xv Med nga-yawan. Bonjdjel, bonjdjel kun-wok. Bonjdjel Buyhmi yo, bonjdjel. Ngahbarna, wanjh Bolmo. Bedman kedderrekedderre nawu nani wurdurd bedman kedderrekedderre manu Dordokkiyu kunwok, bedman bonjdjel Buyhmi.\
\\xe Hang on, um, the word is fv:bonjdjel, fv:bonjdjel, that\'92s the Buyhmi clan\'92s fv:kundangwok word. The Bolmo people [at Marlkawo] say fv:ngahbarna. And the Bolmo at Dordokkiyu, these young fellas here, they say fv:kedderrekedderre but the Buyhmi say fv:bonjdjel.\
\\sd kundangwok\
\\dt 27/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx kedjebe\
\\ps n.\
\\ge file.snake\
\\re file snake\
\\re Arafura file snake\
\\re fi:Acrochordus_arafurae\
\\de Arafura file snake.\
\\sc Acrochordus arafurae\
\\pdn 1. ngaldjangarabunebune 2. ngaldjangarakerlkkerlk\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= bekka, Kdj= nawandak\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kekkek\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv D, E\
\\lit Dangbon name for green pygmy-goose, Nettapus pulchellus.\
\
\\lx kela\
\\va na-bulanj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv Kela nuye Nabima, kun-red ngamed ka-boyo anbu Wurrumulah fi:that Nabima nuye kun-red. \
\\xe It belongs to him, Kela Nabima, that place where there is water, Wurrumulah, that's Nabima's country.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W, Kdj= na-bulanj\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kelbi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge crocodile.lair\
\\re crocodile lair or tunnel\
\\de Crocodile's lair or tunnel near the water's edge (of both freshwater and estuarine crocodiles).\
\\xv Ka-rohrowk, bu ka-yime kinga ka-bolkbun, ngarri-ngeybun nganeke kure kanjdji, kure ku-wukku, kelbi, modjarrkki ka-karrme kelbi ka-rohrowk.\
\\xe Just as the saltwater crocodile builds (a lair) in the ground, and we call that place a fi:gelbi which is underground, which (has an entrance) under the water, and in just the same way the freshwater crocodile also has a lair. \
\
\\lx kele\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de fear\
\
\\lx kelebuk\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de domestic (of animals) 2. not easily frightened\
\\cf kelebukminj\
\\ce It has become tame.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx kelebukmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become tame\
\
\\lx kele-lobme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de run away in fear, flee\
\\xv Birri-nang mako karrmeng wanjh birri-kelelobmeng.\
\\xe When they saw him grabbing the gun they took off in fear.\
\
\\lx kelemen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be afraid\
\\xv nga-kele\
\\xe I'm afraid\
\\xv birri-keleminj\
\\xe They were frightened.\
\\xv Birri-kele-rlobmeng.\
\\xe They ran away frightened.\
\\nt CHECK, what is v.t. form?\
\
\\lx kelere\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go in fear\
\
\\lx kelewarre\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge untamed\
\\re untamed\
\\re wild (animal)\
\\de untamed, easily frightened, not domesticated (of animals)\
\\an kelebuk\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx ken\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'oops'\
\
\\lx kengeme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de be afraid of, fearful of\
\\xv Kulawuddul ngurri-kengemen!\
\\xe You initiates be fearful!\
\
\\lx kerdekerde\
\\ps n.\
\\de soap suds, lather\
\\sy nunjno\
\
\\lx kerdme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sink down and become stuck, bogged\
\\xv Kerdmeng muddikang ngadberre.\
\\xe Our truck is bogged.\
\
\\lx Kerlah\
\\ps n. place name\
\\de just south of Marrkolidjban\
\
\\lx kerlk\
\\ps adj.\
\\de soft, easy\
\\ee Languages can be described as fv:kun-kerlk ,'soft, or easy'. The opposite is fv:kun-rayek, hard or\
difficult. The Kuninjku say that in comparison to Kunwinjku (to the west) their language is\
fv:kun-rayek. But in comparison to Rembarrnga, Dangbon, and Kune, and other southern languages,\
their language is fv:kun-kerlk, easy or soft.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kerlk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Term used by eastern Mayali speakers to describe the variety of Kunwinjku/Mayali spoken in the west,\
such as at Kunbarlanja (Oenpelli).\
\\uv E=na-kerlk.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kerlkbak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de brush made from bark used to soak up wild honey or as a paint brush for art work.\
\
\\lx kerlkdan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de become soft\
\\xv Karri-kinje ka-kerlkdan.\
\\xe If we cook it, it'll become soft.\
\\sn 2\
\\de become sore\
\\xv "Ah ah, nga-kerlkdanj manih ngarrengekerlkdanj minj bale ka-yime ngare.\
Nga-karre-rlurlmeng rowk, nga-rlurlmeng rowk.\
\\xe "Ah ah, I'm sore, here, my lower leg's sore, what can I do? My leg's swollen, it's all swollen."\
\\cf ka-kerlkdanj\
\\ce It has become soft, flat (of tyres), or sore.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kerlkwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de soften\
\
\\lx kernalk\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge straw-necked.ibis\
\\re straw-necked ibis\
\\re fi:Threskiornis_spinicollis\
\\de Straw-necked ibis and also white ibis.\
\\sc Threskiornis spinicollis, Threskiornis molucca\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= karrarla\
\\sn 2\
\\ge cattle.egret\
\\re cattle egret\
\\re fi:Ardea_alba\
\\re fi:Ardea_ibis\
\\de Cattle egret, great eastern egret. Note that in Kunwinjku fv:kernalk is the name for the straw-necked ibis but some Kune speakers call the cattle egret fv:kernalk.\
\\sc Ardea ibis, Ardea alba\
\\uv E\
\\ur W, I= komorlo\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kerno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de Spines. Spikes or spines on the bodies of fish such as the three spikes on catfish and  the spines of echidnas.\
\\xv Ngarrbek ka-karrme kerno.\
\\xe The echidna has spines.\
\\uv I, W= keno\
\\dt 19/Oct/2015 \
\
\\lx kengborlh\
\\va kerngborlh\
\\syn kalkkalk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lizard.sp\
\\re two-lined dragon\
\\re fi:Diporiphora_bilineata\
\\de Two-lined dragon. Some people use this name as fv:kun-kurrng register and fv:kalkkalk as ordinary register whilst others use it as ordinary register (e.g. Kundedjnjenghmi speakers).\
\\xv Minj yi-ngun kerngborlh, na-warre.\
\\xe You can't eat the two-lined dragon, it's no good to eat\
\\sc Diporiphora bilineata\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kalkkalk\
\\p two-lined dragon1.jpg, two-lined dragon2.jpg\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kenjkenj\
\\ps n.\
\\de pulse\
\
\\lx kerngmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pick a fish up by lifting it by the gills\
\
\\lx kerngno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de gills of fish\
\
\\lx kerdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de having spikes such as catfish have.\
\
\\lx kerhwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de scoop up with butterfly fish net\
\\xv Balang kerhweng mey djenj birri-kang birri-kinjeng.\
\\xe Balang scooped up the fish (with a butterfly net) and they took them and cooked them.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kerre\
\\ps n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language name, East Alligator area\
\\de the Kunwinjku language name for the language Erre\
\\xv Wulk, kure Balanda kabirri-ngeybun 'Red Lily' nawu korroko bedberre birri-wokdi Kerre kun-wok.\
\\xe At Wulk, which non-Aboriginal people call 'Red Lily' (East Alligator, Gunbalanya road) it belonged to people who used to speak the Erre language.\
\\dt 22/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx kerri\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\de antbed, ground oven\
\\va kun-kerre\
\\cf kerringun\
\\ce eat antbed\
\\cf kerribun\
\\ce cook in an earth oven using lumps of antbed\
\
\\lx kerribun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cook food in a ground oven using antbed fv:kun-kerri.\
\
\\lx kerrimang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de obtain antbed for use in an earth oven\
\\xv Wanjh djorlmeng ngalengman wam kure kerri-mey man-bunbarr mey la korroko\
birri-kerri-bom birri-nanganang birri-wilkmey birri-wilkmey rowk.\
\\xe Then she went a long way getting antbed and herbs for the meat (Corynotheca lateriflora), but the rest\
of them had already cooked the meat and taken it out of the oven.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kerrkerr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de grey teal\
\\sc Anas gibberifrons\
\
\\lx kerrnge\
\\ps adj.\
\\de new\
\\xv man-kerrnge muddikang\
\\xe new truck\
\\xv Na-kerrnge ka-rrukmirri.\
\\xe A new man is working.\
\\xv Birri-kerrhkerrnge kabirri-djare konda kabirri-ngime kamak.\
\\xe These new people, they want to come here, it's OK for them to enter.\
\
\\lx kerrngehme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de renew\
\
\cf2 \\lx kerrngekenh\
\\ps temp. adv.\
\\de Previously, before, in recent times.\
\\xe Bu kerrngekenhni, nawu Shire birrinahnani store.\
\\xv Previously the Shire was running the store\
\\so Adjumarllarl Aboriginal Corporation community newsletter, 2015\
\\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx kewkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de doubt, not believe\
\\xv Yi-ben-marneyimen wurdurd kinga kahyo. Korroko ba kabirri-kewkkewkme.\
\\xe Tell those children there's a crocodile there. I did already but they don't believe it.\
\
\\lx kewurd\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kundebi.term\
\\re triadic kin term\
\\de Triadic or fv:kun-debi kin term the reciprocal of which is the same, my child (male speaking), we are siblings. Thus this can include two brothers speaking about the child of one or a brother and sister referring to the brother's son. It can also include the situation where the 'son' of a man is also a skewed generation 'son' e.g. you are my fv:mawah \'91SC\'92, my cross-cousin (who is my skewed 'son'), your mamamh.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx keyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sleep\
\\uv W\
\\uv I=kodjdjeyo\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ke:\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'Is that so!', 'I see'\
\
\\lx kid-\
\\ps n. pred.\
\\re ensorcelled\
\\re under sorcery, ensorcelled\
\\de Under sorcery, spiritually dead though appearing still alive.\
\\xv Kun-warre, barri-danjbom ba-kidni. (Kdj)\
\\xe It was terrible, he was speared and already spiritually dead through sorcery though still alive.\
\\xv Kunkare kondanjkunu kunred ngalkudji daluk bibayeng nabang nayin yirrbardbard wanjh doweng. Minj burudjang bibayemeninj dowimeninj dja korroko kidni birridanjbom.\
\\xe A long time ago here at this place, a woman was bitten by a venomous snake, a taipan, and she died. It wasn\'92t just an accidental incident which killed her because some people had already killed her through sorcery.\
\\dt 25/July/2012\
\
\\lx Kidbulmaniyimarra\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename for Yamarrk clan\
\\de Estate name for the Yamarrk clan. A 'big place' name or fv:kun-bolkngeykimuk.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx kidjdjahdjanj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de white bush apple\
\\sc Syzygium forte ssp.potamophilum\
\\uv I,Kune Na-kerlk\
\\uv Kune Na-rayek =madjabuli\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kidjdjarn\
\\ps n.\
\\de foods and objects restricted or taboo to ceremonial neophytes or initiates.\
\
\\lx kidjkidj\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de spirit figure, nasty one, lives in the bush and spears kangaroos, but can kill humans if disturbed.\
Normally he smells people coming and runs away or he can ascend up into the clouds. He can also\
change his form into that of a kangaroo.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kihno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de green plant matter, alive as opposed to dead or dried out plant material.\
\
\\lx kikkik\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge brown.honey.eater\
\\re brown honey-eater\
\\re fi:Lichmera_indistincta\
\\de Brown honey-eater.\
\\sc Lichmera indistincta\
\\sn 2\
\\ge small.birds\
\\re small birds (generic)\
\\de Small bird (generic).\
\\xv Bininj barri-buyika barri-marnburrinj kikkik barri-warlbom.\
\\xe The other people turned into small birds and went hunting.\
\\xv Nga-bukkan bulanj kikkik, ka-ngeybimbun.\
\\xe I'm showing Bulanj all the names of these birds, he's writng the names down.\
\\sc Lichmera indistincta\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kikkikyaw\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place near Kudjekbinj\
\
\\lx kilekme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de touch, take hold of something\
\\xv Wurdurd, yuwn ngurri-kilekme mako mani.\
\\xe Children, don't touch this shotgun\
\
\\lx kilel\
\\ps adj.\
\\de small amount, 'little bit'\
\\uv W\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kilhken\
\\ps loc. adv.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de down, at the bottom etc\
\\pde kanjdji\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kilwirrkilwirr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Lily\
\\sc Crinum asiaticum and C. augustofolium\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= kurlumudduk\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kimang\
\\ps v.t\
\\de Send word for someone to come.\
\\xv Nga-kimang na-Wakadj kamhre konhda karri-wokdi.\
\\xe I\'92m sending a message for na-Wakadj come here so we can all have a discussion.\
\\dt 14/May/2016\
\
\\lx kimuk\
\\pr noun class/PRON\
\\ps adj.\
\\de big, large\
\\xv kabbala man-kimuk\
\\xe big boat\
\\xv njamkimuk\
\\xe fat (lit. big intestines)\
\\xv ngurri-kihkimuk\
\\xe All you big people...\
\\pdn kk = -korrongko.\
\
\\lx kinbalen\
\\pr na-/ngal- etc\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de mother's mother, non-vocative form, fv:kakkak\
\\uv Dj, W?\
\\uv I = -djongmiken\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kindjek\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cheeky.yam\
\\re cheeky yam\
\\re yam sp.\
\\re fi:Dioscorea_bulbifera\
\\de cheeky yam\'97 so called because of toxins in the edible tuber which must first be removed by leaching. The yam is sliced thinly (traditionally with a blade made from the shoulder bone of a macropod), and placed into a string bag which is then immersed into a flowing watercourse overnight or longer. The toxin-free slices are then cooked and eaten.\
\\xv Nawu dabborrabbolk nawu nayuhyungki korrokoni birribimbuni mayh nawu bim yiman kayime kunj, ngurrurdu, ngalmangeyi dja mak djenj. Dja manme warridj yiman kayime kayawal, mankindjek dja njalehnjale manmebuyika manu. \
\\xe They also painted (in rock shelters) images of vegetable foods such as long yams (fi:Dioscorea_transversa), cheeky yams (fi:Dioscorea_bulbifera) and other kinds of foods. Those early ancestors a very long time ago painted images of animals such as kangaroos, emus, long neck turtles and fish.\
\\syn man-yawok\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 29/Jul/2010\
\
\\lx kindjilkkindjilk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Syzygium_armstrongii\
\\re fi:Syzygium_armstrongii\
\\de Large evergreen tree (12-20m) which grows along freshwater streams and has an edible white fruit in the wet season. Wood used for dug out canoes.\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= man-kindjirrbinj, Djnj, Kdj= an-kardadjirr\
\\sc fi:Syzygium_armstrongii (formerly fi:Eugenia_armstrongii)\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kindjirrbinj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Syzygium_armstrongii\
\\re fi:Syzygium_armstrongii\
\\de Large evergreen tree (12-20m) which grows along freshwater streams and has an edible white fruit in the wet season.\
\\sc Syzygium armstrongii\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= man-kindjilkkindjilk, Djnj, Kdj= an-kardadjirr\
\\ee The 'white apple' fruit is edible but not favoured and is available from fv:kunumeleng to fv:kudjewk.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kinhkinh\
\\ps n.\
\\de stars\
\
\\lx Kinmurlukku\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:na-kurulk clan estate near fv:Manngalkadjurrmi. It is a sandy place with large fig trees\
(fv:man-bornde).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kinga\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Salt-water crocodile\
\\sc Crocodylus porosus\
\\sy namanjwarre\
\\pdn kk = ngandjakdjalarrk\
\\ee REM = mokko\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de multi-stemmed spreading shrub/small tree\
\\xv Kinj mirrhno ka-karrme kan-wirrkme.\
\\xe fi:Cathormium_umbellatum has spikes that scratch us.\
\\sc fi:Cathormium_umbellatum\
\
\\lx Kinj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\re place name\
\\de Place at Bulkay on the Tomkinson River flood plain. There is a small hill there where people used to camp.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 12/Mar/2015\
\
\\lx kinjbarlen\
\\pr ngal-/na-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge matrilineal.parallel.grandkin\
\\re matrilineal parallel grandkin (referential)\
\\de one's matrilineal parallel grandkin\
\\xv Ngalih ngal-kinjbarlen nuye.\
\\xe She is his/her mother's mother.\
\\xv Kan-wo, ngaye ngal-kinjbarlen.\
\\xe Give me [some], I am [your] mother's mother.\
\\syn ngal-djongmiken, na-djongmiken\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 30/Mar/2011\
\
\\lx Kindjed\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Kindjed is a rocky narrowing of the Goomadeer River with some rapids and white water leading to a lower waterfall, just downstream of Kularrhdjurle. It lies on the \'91Goomadeer\'92 branch of the river, as this heads out of savanna country and into a rocky area just before it meets the \'91Gumardir\'92 branch of the river. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 18/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kindjek\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cheeky.yam\
\\re cheeky yam\
\\re water yam\
\\re round yam\
\\re Dioscorea bulbifera\
\\re Dioscorea sativa\
\\sd plant\
\\de round yam or water yam, also known in Aboriginal English as 'cheeky yam' due to the toxins which must be leached out of the tuber\
before it is rendered edible\
\\sc Dioscorea bulbifera, Dioscorea sativa\
\\uv Djnj, W, Kdj\
\\uv I= man-yawok\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kinje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cook, burn, light up a cigarette\
\\xv Kakanjkinje.\
\\xe She is cooking meat.\
\\pdn kk = bobekke\
\\dt 12/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx Kirdilinj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate, birthplace of Na-wakadj Don Na-Kirdilinj.\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kirndih\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\va kirndihno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fish.trap.post\
\\re fish.trap.post\
\\re posts (horizontal) of fish trap\
\\sd plant\
\\de saplings used to construct a fence fish trap across a flowing watercourse\
\\xv Kirndihno kun-dulk barri-warnamkani kun-kalewobe.\
\\xe The fence posts used in a fv:kun-kalewobe fishtrap [layed horizontally] are called fv:kirndihno.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kirh\
\\va kih\
\\sn 1\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge wet\
\\re wet\
\\de wet\
\\xv ka-kirh\
\\xe It's wet.\
\\uv I, E= -kirh, W, Djnj, Kdj= -kih\
\\sn 2\
\\va kirhno\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mud\
\\re mud\
\\de mud, wet soil\
\\sn 3\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge vagina\
\\re vagina\
\\de vagina (an indirect term)\
\\lit food class prefix+wet\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx kirh\
\\ps n.\
\\pr man-\
\\sd body part\
\\de vagina\
\
\\lx kirhno\
\\ps n.\
\\re mud\
\\de Mud or mud like viscous substances.\
\\sd geographic\
\
\\lx kirhwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de wet, make wet\
\\xv Mandjewk kirh-wong kun-madj ngardduk.\
\\xe The rain has made all my clothes wet.\
\
\\lx Kirrbekirrbendulk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site on an upper tributary of the Goomadeer River. Near the escarpment edge around 24km south (upstream) of the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 and \'91Goomadeer\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kirrbel\
\\pr ngal-\
\\de white-faced heron\
\\sc Ardea novaehollandiae\
\
\\lx kirriwuk-kirriwuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge gidee.gidee\
\\re gidee gidee\
\\re fi:Abrus_precatorius\
\\de Gidee gidee, (also called crab's eye or jequerity beans); has bright red and black seeds used in necklaces.\
\\sc Abrus precatorius\
\\sd plants\
\\sy karrawukka\
\\ur Kdj= an-kindjilkindjil\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kiwalak\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kundebi term\
\\re kundebi term\
\\de Kundebi (kunderbi, underbuy) tri-relational kinship term; your ngalkurrng or nakurrng i.e mother-in-law or son-in-law (i.e. fv:balk). The reciprocal term is always fv:nababba/albabba. The term can be used in the following three-way kinship contexts: 1. you are my kangkinj \'91ZC\'92, my skewed \'91F\'92 (e.g. FZS>F, nganemodjarrkdorrinj), your nakurrng \'91MMBS\'92; 2. you are my mawah \'91FF\'92, my F(B), your son; 3. you are my fv:mawah \'91FF\'92, my son, your nakurrng \'91SSS\'92; 3. you are my MM, my F, your BS (or classificatory nakurrng \'91MMBS\'92); 4.you are my MM, my skewed F (FZS/MBS>F), your cross-cousin/MMBDS; 5. you are my MMB, my F, your fv:nakurrng \'91MMBSSS\'92; 6. you are my MMB, my skewed father (cross cousin FZS>F, MBS>F), your fv:kanjok \'91brother-in-law\'92; 7. your are my MM, my S/D, your DSC (also BS or F); 8. you are my yB (male speaker), our skewed father (i.e. fv:nganemodjarrkdorrinj FZS>F); 9. you are my kangkinj \'91ZC\'92, my skewed FZ (FZD>FZ), your mother-in-law (classificatory, not actual); 10. you are my mawah \'91FF\'92, my D, your ngalkurrng \'91SSD\'92; 11. you are my MM, my FZ, your BD (also possible FZ or mother-in-law); 12. you are my MM, my FZ, your FZ; 13. you are my MM, my FZ, your fv:ngalkurrng (mother-in-law); 14. you are my MM, my skewed FZ (FZD/MBD>FZ), your cross-cousin or MMBDD; 15. you are my MMB, my FZ, your ngalkurrng \'91mother-in-law\'92; 16. you are my ZDS, my fv:kanjok \'91cross cousin\'92, your FM; 17. you are my yB (male speaker), our skewed fv:berlu 'FZ' (fv:nganemodjarrkdorrinj FZD>FZ). \
\\cn nababba\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ko\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge waterlily\
\\re waterlily corms\
\\re fi:Nymphaea_spp.\
\\de pulverised corms of water lily flowers (Nymphaea spp.) eaten as a paste or made into dampers. The part of the plant used is called fv:nganjno.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx -ko\
\\ps dyadic suffix\
\\ge dyad\
\\re dyadic suffix\
\\de Pair of individuals who stand in a particular relationship of commonality with each other\
\\xv dabborrabbolkko\
\\xe Those two old men.\
\\xv Beneridko.\
\\xe Those two who are always arguing with each other.\
\\xv Ngeyko.\
\\xe Namesake (term of address to someone with the same name).\
\\xv Yun kandung, nganebeyko.\
\\xe Don't swear at me, we are a father-son pair.\
\\xv Birriyawkohyawko.\
\\xe Numerous mother and child pairs (or technically, numerous adjacent generation matrilineal pairs).\
\\xv En nabarrkidko mak kabenemamang ngulanyak kareh.\
\\xe And those other two also, they will bring some tomorrow maybe.\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 01/Apr/2016\
\
\\lx -ko\
\\ps temporal suffix\
\\de during the time of\
\\xv Kun-kurrako.\
\\xe In the windy season.\
\\xv Wularriko.\
\\xe During the westerly wind season.\
\
\\lx kobahkobanj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Variant plural form of fv:ngal-kohbanj and fv:na-kohbanj.\
\\ng There is great variation in the plural forms of this noun which dispenses with the noun class prefix. This means the plural form no longer explicitly marks gender (i.e. a group of elderly males, females or mixed gender group).\
\\cf kobokohbanj, kobohkobanj, kobohbanj, kohbahkohbanj, kobakohbanj, kohbakohbanj\
\\ce plural form\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx kobakohbanj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Variant plural form of fv:ngal-kohbanj and fv:na-kohbanj.\
\\ng There is great variation in the plural forms of this noun which dispenses with the noun class prefix. This means the plural form no longer explicitly marks gender (i.e. a group of elderly males, females or mixed gender group).\
\\cf kobahkobanj, kobokohbanj, kobohkobanj, kohbahkohbanj, kobohbanj\
\\ce plural form\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx kobam\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de calf muscle\
\
\\lx kobbiring\
\\ps n.\
\\re Kakadu dunnart\
\\re dunnart\
\\re fi:Sminthopsis_bindi\
\\de Kakadu dunnart.\
\\sc Sminthopsis bindi\
\\sy bing, birng\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd mammal\
\
\\lx kobbol\
\\ps n.\
\\re bandicoot\
\\re brown bandicoot\
\\re northern brown bandicoot\
\\re fi:Isoodon_macrourus\
\\de Northern brown bandicoot.\
\\xv Kobbol dengekunj, djenkehno ka-marnbun, ka-yo.\
\\xe The northern brown bandicoot has feet like a kangaroo and makes a nest in which to sleep.\
\\sc Isoodon macrourus\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= yok.\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kobbolnjerrhdord\'9cbminj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kobeng\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de husband, wife (term of address)\
\
\\lx kobengngani\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent\
brother-in-law, hearer calls referent brother 2.my brother-in-law, your fv:kakkak, you and I call each\
other fv:mamamh. 3.My brother-in-law, your father, you are my nephew. 4.My brother-in-law or\
fv:kakkali, your brother-in-law (second choice), you are my fv:kakkak or mother's mother's brother\
\\cn na-wuka.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kobinj\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fern.sp.\
\\re fi:Drynaria_quercifolia (fern)\
\\re fi:Dicranopteris_linearis (fern)\
\\re fern fi:spp.\
\\de various kinds of fern which grow on rocks\
\\sc Drynaria quercifolia, Dicranopteris linearis fs:possibly_also Cheilantha sp. \
\\sy kuluban djurdno\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx kobohbanj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Variant plural form of fv:ngal-kohbanj and fv:na-kohbanj.\
\\ng There is great variation in the plural forms of this noun which dispenses with the noun class prefix. This means the plural form no longer explicitly marks gender (i.e. a group of elderly males, females or mixed gender group).\
\\cf kobahkobanj, kobokohbanj, kobohkobanj, kohbahkohbanj, kobakohbanj\
\\ce plural form\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx kobohkobanj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Variant plural form of fv:ngal-kohbanj and fv:na-kohbanj.\
\\ng There is great variation in the plural forms of this noun which dispenses with the noun class prefix. This means the plural form no longer explicitly marks gender (i.e. a group of elderly males, females or mixed gender group).\
\\cf kobahkobanj, kobokohbanj, kobohbanj, kohbahkohbanj, kobakohbanj\
\\ce plural form\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
 \
\\lx kobokohbanj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Variant plural form of fv:ngal-kohbanj and fv:na-kohbanj.\
\\ng There is great variation in the plural forms of this noun which dispenses with the noun class prefix. This means the plural form no longer explicitly marks gender (i.e. a group of elderly males, females or mixed gender group).\
\\cf kobohkobanj, kobohbanj, kohbahkohbanj, kobakohbanj, kobahkobanj\
\\ce plural form\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx kobun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de flower, come into flower.\
\
\\lx kod\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de tea-tree bark\
\\sc Melaleuca spp. (generic)\
\\pdn kk = kun-burlburl\
\\cf kodbun (v.t.)\
\\ce peel off tea-tree bark\
\
\\lx kodbarre\
\\ps n.\
\\de house\
\\sy kurrambalk\
\
\\lx kodbarrebun\
\\ps n.\
\\de make a shelter with enclosed walls out of paperbark\
\
\\lx kodbe\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Cayratia_trifolia\
\\de Two similar species of annual scrambling vines from perennial rootstock with leaf opposed tendrils. The black currant-like acidic fruits eaten but are not a popular food as they sting and stain the tongue and mouth. The tuberous roots of Cayratia_trifolia (but not fi:Cayratia_maritima) are also eaten and are peeled and roasted in fv:kudjewk season. Each root has a number of swellings (tubers) along its length, usually about 5 cm long and 2.5 cm diameter, which are fv:an-bang (\'91causing a burning or stinging\'92). These can be eaten after roasting in hot sand and ashes for some time. The large tubers are peeled after cooking but the skin of smaller ones is usually eaten. \
\\sc Cayratia trifolia, Cayratia maritima\
\\ee 'Old people like them but it burns our (young people's) tongue\'92. Wallabies dig and eat them.\
\\xv Man-kodbe ngarri-wilkdeng.\
\\xe We cook fi:Cayratia_trifolia in the ashes.\
\\p 107 Cayratia trifolia tubers.jpg, Cayratia trifolia.jpg\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kodbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de peel paperbark off the trunk of Melaleuca trees\
\
\\lx Koddumno\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\ee the informant (DK) was not sure of the name. The spelling may need checking.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kodildil\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\pdv kk\
\\de green plum\
\\sc Buchanania obovata\
\\pde man-dudjmi.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kodkah Dimirndi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kod Kalurlhdi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place.n.\
\\re placename in Benebenemdi estate\
\\de Place name in Benebenemdi estate which is the focus of fv:wayarra totems of the fv:Barabba clan. About 40m from the main channel of Imimbar Creek is a stone about one metre high which represents the spirit being Namakku crouched over with a bad of yams on his back. Custodians of the site believe that if the stone is disturbed, dangerous fv:wayarra will appear and walk around. Six other similar stones nearby represent other totemic fv:wayarra. A hollow log coffin at Kod Kalurlhdi contains the remains of the brother of Jacky Larranggai (who once lived at Beswick).\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx kodngawirdidbun\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de bird species with beautiful song\
\\xv Kodngawirdidbun, nakka kunkod kankodyirrung nomo karri-marnekodbun o\
ngarri-marnekodbun ka-rrohmirri 'Kunkod ngarduk bonj ngurri-mang' ka-yime.\
Anmurlmu, ankorrko andarl...... Yi-na barri-marnekodbom ka-rrohmirri.\
\\xe The kodngawirdidbun bird gets angry with us when we peel paperbark from its tree and it says 'You're\
taking my paperbark'. Melaleuca species (argentea, leucadendra). They'd peel paperbark and it would\
sing out.\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx Kodwalewale\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djordi clan estate.\
\\xv Kodwalewale kun-red-djordi Dangbon darnki.\
\\xe Kodwalewale is in Djordi clan estate close to Dangbon lands.\
\
\\lx kodwalidjbun\
\\ps n.\
\\ge warbler\
\\re white-throated gerygone\
\\re fi:Gerygone_albogularis\
\\de White-throated gerygone.\
\\xv Kodwalidjbun kayedmarnbun kunkod.\
\\xe The white-throated warbler makes its nest of out paperbark.\
\\ee So-called because it makes its nest out of long strips of fv:kunkod 'paperbark'.\
\\sc Gerygone albogularis\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 16/Sep/2012\
\
\\lx kodj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kodjno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de head 2. top of an elongate object\
\\pdn kk= kunbambara\
\
\\lx kodjbang\
\\ps adj.\
\\mr kodj 'head' bang 'wild/dangerous'\
\\ge wild\
\\re wild person, aggressive\
\\de not familiar with settled life, forthright and quick to anger\
\\ng will take participant prefix, fv:na-kodjbang 'wild man'\
\\xv Djabinj bani-reyi, nani bani-daykani karrkad , nawu kodjbangko Bulanj,\
Kodjok bani-reyi. \
\\xe Those two (the Nakorrkko) they were (at first) uncircumcised and they were circumcised when they went up to the plateau, those two wild men Bulanj and Kodjok were travelling.\
\\ee This term is sometimes used to describe traditional ancestral heroes whose behaviour is contrasted with the settled life of modern times.\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kodjbang\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Aponogeton.elongatus\
\\re fi:Aponogeton_elongatus\
\\de Tuberous aquatic perennial with mainly submerged leaves and edible nutty corms, 'water peanut'\
\\xv Mamamh barri-mangi an-kodjbang dorreng kuni kah-di an-kodjbang. An-kodjbang an-dem, kumekke arri-nguni kuni\
ku-waddaburrk ngarri-yoy.\
\\xe My grandparents used to get those water peanuts, you can find them over there. Water peanuts and waterlilies, that's where we ate those foods there at that well known camping place where we camped.\
\\sc Aponogeton elongatus\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, I, E, W\
\\ur Kdj synonym = anbidjoh\
\\pdn kk = man-bordengkekorrongko\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kodjbombom\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de kind of ant species\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx kodjborledke\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de call to mind, cause to reminisce\
\\xv Ngankodjborledkeng\
\\xe That has reminded me (of a place or other time).\
\
\\lx kodjborroborrohme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de shake one's head in disapproval, disgust or distaste\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kodjboyorr\
\\pr man-\
\\va kodjboyorrno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge headwater\
\\re headwater\
\\de Headwater, source of a watercourse (often featuring what appears to be a washaway).\
\\xv Kakodjdubbe kodjboyorrno.\
\\xe That's the headwater source (of a watercourse).\
\\dt 31/Aug/2012\
\
\\lx kodjbukirrire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dream\
\
\\lx kodjbulu\
\\ps n.\
\\de grey hair\
\\xv Ka-kodjbulu.\
\\xe She has grey hair.\
\
\\lx kodjbulumen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge get.grey.hair\
\\re develop grey hair\
\\de Develop grey hair.\
\\xv Ngayih berluhwarre anbukkahbukkang Nawirddili, barrihbengkani, bawam kureh walem bakodjbuluminj walem.\
\\xe Me and my cross-cousin who is your aunty, we were shown that by Nawirddili, who went and entered middle age (i.e. developed grey hair) down south, there in the south (i.e. at Manyallaluk).\
\\dt 02/Sep/2012\
\
\\lx kodjburr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\sn 1\
\\de head-dress used by dancers of mimih style dance. 2. Roll of thick string spun from bark of\
fv:man-budbud (Brachychiton paradoxum).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kodjb\'falindjirr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de unidentified escarpment country plant.\
\\uv E.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kodjdang\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de crown\
\
\\lx kodjdinjhno\
\\ps n.\
\\de lump on the head of male magpie geese\
\
\\lx kodjdong\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge confuse\
\\re confuse, defeat mentally\
\\re mentally defeat\
\\de Confuse, defeat mentally OBJ\
\\xv Nanih kun-wok nga-bengkan, nanih na-buyika ngan-kodjdong.\
\\xe Some words I know but these other ones confound me (can't work them out).\
\\xv Bekkang bi-kodjdoy kun-ngey.\
\\xe She heard the word and didn't know what it meant.\
\\dt 30/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx kodjdorren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Hit one's self on the head in mortuary ritual as an expression of grief. This can sometimes cause injury resulting in much bleeding.\
\\cf Djorrkkun ka-kodjdokodjdorren.\
\\ce Urine stains on rock ledges near the nests of the rock ringtail possum (Petropseudes dahli) are similar to the colour of dried blood. These urine stains on the rock are described as 'the rock ringtail-possum hitting himself on the head in ritual grief'.\
\\dt 30/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx kodjdubbe\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps Nom. Adj. compound\
\\ge headwaters\
\\re headwaters\
\\de Headwaters of a watercourse; (a nominal-adjectival compound with a predicate pronominal prefix)\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 01/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx kodjdubbebun\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge come.to.headwaters\
\\re come to headwaters\
\\de Ending of a watercourse at its headwaters.\
\\xv Ka-wohkodjdubbe ka-wohwanjdjadkodjdubbe wanjh an-berrk ka-yiburnbun. \
\\xe The stream comes to its headwaters along the way (towards an escarpment for example), the tributary\'92s headwaters appear and then the forested open country finishes.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 01/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx kodjdukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de nod the head\
\
\\lx kodjdjan\
\\pref\
\\va ngal-wamud, al-wamud\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv That babolknahnani konda bani-bolknahnani mamamh ngayeken nadjah-.... nangamed Nadjunjdjunj, \
bad bi-kani ngalkodjok, kodjdjan karrimen wamuddjan barlmaded. \
\\xe Those two used to look after this country, my grandfather (mother's father) Nadjunjdjunj and his wife was ngal-kodjok, \
kodjdjan, I mean wamuddjan, excuse me for referring to my (classificatory) sister.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W= fv:ngal-wamud, Kdj= al-wamud\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kodjdjenkuyeng\
\\pr nga, yi-, ka- etc\
\\ps adj.\
\\de thirsty,'tongue hanging out' (e.g. for grog)\
\\un this is an idiom with often humorous overtones\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kodjdjerrkdi\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lie on side\
\
\\lx kodjdjewakwan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sleep through an event and not know what happened\
\\xv A:Balanda kam-wokngimeng ngun-yawam. B:Ken! Nga-kodjdjewakwam.\
\\xe A: A Balanda (non-Aboriginal person) called (on the radio) looking for you. B: Oops I didn't know, I\
was asleep.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kodjdjeyo\
\\va kodjkeyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sleep, lay down to rest\
\\cf mimkodjdje\
\\ce be sleepy\
\\uv W=keyo, kebun.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kodjdjileno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de comb of birds or rainbow serpent.\
\\xv Kodj-njamed yiman kokkorrolorrol ka-karrme, kodjdjileno.\
\\xe That thing on the head, like a rooster has, a comb.\
\
\\lx kodjdjorn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.grub\
\\re white tree grub\
\\re wit\
\\de White tree grubs or 'witchetty grub'.\
\\uv Kdj, Djnj, I\
\\ur W= dolek\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 03/Sep/2012\
\
\\lx Kodjdjorn Kadjangdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Woodgrub djang (Dreaming site) in the headwaters of a creek in the Djalbangurrk estate. The focus of the djang are the black termite mounds on the plain next to the creek. The increase ritual involved breaking the termite mounds and calling out the places where an increase in the wood grubs was desired. Located in a remote stone country area only about  3.5km east of the upper Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer), however the water flows northeast from here to eventually become Kumarrirnbang Creek (mapped as \'91Manggabor Creek\'92) which flows past Kumarrirnbang outstation. Upstream of Korrbelak and Kamarangdjabdi, about 3km northeast of Makkalarl. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kodje\
\cf2 \\va kodjdje, kodjke\cf0 \
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Days (lit: sleeps), effectively this word means a 24 hour period.\
\\xv \cf2 Kunkodje bokenh ngarriyoy kumekke\cf0 .\
\\xe We stayed/slept there for three days.\
\cf2 \\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx kodjekmang\
\\ps v.t\
\\de kidnap\
\\xv Yun djarre yi-re wardi mimih ngun-kodjekmang.\
\\xe Don't go too far away otherwise a fv:mimih spirit might kidnap you.\
\
\\lx kodjekurrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de lay something down flat 2.put to sleep\
\\xv kan-kodjekurrme\
\\xe You are making me sleepy.\
\
\\lx kodjewake\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de crawl along the ground. 2. Also used as an idiom meaning to go looking for a girlfriend/boyfriend at\
night.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kodjkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lift the head up, (eg. a fish lifting its head out of the water as it swims in order to feed on something).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kodjkandi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety Kundjeyhmi patriclan in Kakadu National Park\
\\xv Mardbaluk, kun-dulk an-mardba ka-bolkngeykenkan. Bolkkodjkandi kumekke.\
\\xe The place Mardbaluk takes its name from the tree fi:an-mardba [fi:-luk is a locative suffix in Jawoyn]. It is a place in the Kodjkandi\
clan's territory.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kodjke\
\cf2 \\va kodjdje, kodje\cf0 \
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Days (lit: sleeps), effectively this word means a 24 hour period.\
\\xv Kunkodjke kunkudji.\
\\xe One night.\
\cf2 \\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx kodjkerebabi\
\\ps adj\
\\ge aggressive\
\\re aggressive\
\\de Pugnacious, eager to quarrel or fight.\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx kodjkurlu\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kodjkurluno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de brain 2. mind\
\\xv Kabirri-kodjkurlu-borledke.\
\\xe They are changing their minds.\
\
\\lx kodjkurlumak\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de an upright and good person 2. a religious follower, member of the clergy\
\
\\lx kodjkurrnginjno\
\\ps n.\
\\de sweat of head\
\
\\lx kodjlarrk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge utility truck\
\\re utility vehicle, ute\
\\de ute, utility vehicle, tray back\
\\xv Bu yiman man-buyika muddika kaben-yingkidong bu kabirri-mankan. Yun bu ngurri-barndi kore man-kodjlarrk. \
\\xe They may be run over by another vehicle or hit the ground if they fall out. You cannot travel in the back of a tray back utility vehicle.\
\\sd neologism\
\\uv W\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx kodjmong\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de widower/widow\
\
\\lx kodjmornmorn\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wildflower.sp.\
\\re fi:Borreria_exserta\
\\re fi:Gomphrena_sp. \
\\re fi:Spermacocce_spp.\
\\de an abundant late wet/early dry season herb with round white head inflorescence. This name is also used for a number of other similar wildflower herbs even with different coloured flowers. The name literally means 'little head' and is a reference to the small round inflorescence.\
\\sc Borreria exserta, Gomphrena canescens, Spermacocce spp.\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kodjmudno\
\\va kun-kodjmud\
\\ps n.\
\\mr kodj 'head' mud 'feather/fur', -no '3rd person possessed suffix'\
\\sn\
\\ge head.feathers\
\\re head feathers\
\\de feathers on the head of a bird\
\\ng incorporable (kodjmud)\
\\xv Ka-kodjmudyak.\
\\xe It has no feathers on its head.\
\\uv W, I, E, Djnj\
\\dt 31/Mar/2007\
\
\
\\lx kodjmukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de forget\
\\uv E\
\\uv I = bengdubbedanj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kodjmurrngno\
\\ps n.\
\\de skull\
\
\\lx kodjnan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr kodj-nan\
\\lit 'head-look'\
\\de be taller than another person\
\\xv Ngan-kodjnan, ngan-yurrhke.\
\\xe He's taller than me, he beats me.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kodjnelk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de fontanelle (the flat soft part of the head of a newborn baby).\
\
\\lx kodjno\
\\va (m)an-kodj\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge melody\
\\re melody\
\\de melody or tune of a song\
\\xv\
\\xe\
\\sn 2\
\\ge rhythmic.mode\
\\re rhythmic mode rhythmic mode of a piece of music or song\
\\sd music\
\\uv W, Djnj, I, E, Kdj\
\\ur\
\\dt 21/Jun/2007\
\\co\
\
\\lx kodjngalhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de have a headache\
\
\\lx kodjngalme\
\\ps v.i\
\\de be born (baby)\
\\xv Ngudda bale yi-kodjngalme?\
\\xe Where were you born?\
\\sy -rrolkan\
\
\\lx kodjngalng\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge yabby.head\
\\re yabby head (term of reference by brother to sister)\
\\de term of reference or address by a man to his sister\
\\sd kinship\
\
\\lx kodjnjirrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re annoyed, pissed off\
\\de Be annoyed, upset or angry.\
\\xv Wurdurd birri-djuhmi wanjh birri-durrkmey kun-bak kobokohbanj birri-kodjnjirrhmeng wanjh man-djewk djakduy ngarri-borrkkeng kun-borrk wanjh man-djewk ngurdmeng.\
\\xe The children went swimming and they pulled up water weed which upset the spirits of the old people, who caused it to rain and so we danced and then the rain stopped.\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx kodjnjirrhnjirr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge moon.snake\
\\re moon snake\
\\re fi:Furina_ornata\
\\de Moon snake\
\\sc Furina ornata\
\\ee kun-njirrke 'charcoal, black'\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kodjok\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\xv A: Nawu na-Kodjok Kunbarlanja na-djongmiken kareh?\
B: Nakka wanjh nanu barri-kukudji, kunred bedberre kunnguya bedberre.\
\\xe A:Is that na-Kodjok man at Oenpelli his sister's daughter's son then?\
B:They are classificatory siblings [one's cross cousin's children skewed to the category of sibling], it is their joint clan land.\
\\sy wamud\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I, E, Djnj=fv:wamud\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kodjok\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr al-\
\\va wamuddjan\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\xv Ngal-kodjok munguyh kabi-djawan! \
\\xe He keeps on asking ngal-kodjok!\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv W\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= fv:wamuddjan, Kdj= al-kodjok\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kodjok\
\\va na-wamud\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku matri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv Bimbom wo. Mamamh ngayeken bimbom nahni warrdjan, yimarnek ngayimi mandingunjngunj barri-[?] , \
bad nakka kukwakwani, nungan warrdjan kukbengkani ngayiken Kodjok Bangardi.\
\\xe He painted it yes. My mother's father painted that pig-nosed turtle, but at first it looked to me like a dugong, \
but he didn't know what a dugong was, but he certainly knew about pig-nosed turtles. \
My grandfather Kodjok (mother's father) and Bangardi.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W, Kdj= na-wamud\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kodjok bamdjelk\
\\sn 1\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\de name of a mythological spirit being who lives in pandanus groves and has multiple penes which spin\
around. He is known to behave in a vulgar manner in the pandanus. He is fv:kodjok subsection.\
\\xv Kodjok bamdjelk na-koykoy nakkan, ka-ruhrukme kure kun-dayarr.\
\\xe Kodjok bamdjelk is a rude bugger, he does pelvic thrusting in the pandanus.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge black.bittern\
\\re black bittern\
\\re fi:Ixobrychus.flavicollis\
\\de Black bittern.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I, W, Kdj= bokung\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kodjrung\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de cooking of the ceremonial feast on the last day of large ceremonies such as Kunabibi.\
\\xv Bolkki kakkawarr ka-bebme malayi ka-kodjrung wanjh bonj karri-yalarrme.\
\\xe Today the ceremonial messenger arrives, tomorrow the ceremonial feast will cook and then we all go\
our seperate ways.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kodjwabun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de sing somebody's head as either a healing or protective measure\
\
\\lx kodjwakbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be dizzy\
\\xv nga-kodjwakbun\
\\xe My head is spinning.\
\
\\lx kodjwerrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\de dandruff\
\
\\lx kodjwidjwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de affect an OBJ by going past it eg. wind blowing past a person or across a stretch of country.\
\\xv Kurebeh kabi-kodjwidjwon Burlmurn.\
\\xe From that side of the country it keeps going past to the other country at Bulmun.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kodjwurrkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de headache or pain from some object stuck in your head such as a sorcery object\
\\xv Nga-kodj-wurrkmeng marrkidjbu kam-wam ngan-kodj-karrmeng ngan-marnbom.\
\\xe I had an object inside my head and the clever man took hold of my head and healed me.\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kodjyurrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de confuse, "mistake my brain"\
\\sn 1\
\\ge misunderstand\
\\re misunderstand, be confused\
\\de not grasp a concept, not be able to understand\
\\ng For this first sense, the subject is the idea or concept not understood. 'It passed by\
my head.'\
\\xv Ngan-kodjyurrhkeng.\
\\xe It confused me, I made a mistake.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge miss_target\
\\re miss target\
\\de miss target when throwing a spear or using a firearm\
\\xv A: Kornobolo ngurri-nang? B: Yo, la kodjyurrhkeng.\
\\xe A: Did you see any wallabies? B: Yes, but he missed (when he tried to shoot one).\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kohbahkohbanj\
\\va kohbakohbanj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Variant plural form of fv:ngal-kohbanj and fv:na-kohbanj.\
\\ng There is great variation in the plural forms of this noun which dispenses with the noun class prefix. This means the plural form no longer explicitly marks gender (i.e. a group of elderly males, females or mixed gender group).\
\\xv Wanjh nawu kohbakohbanj birri-yawani minj birri-ngalkemeninj ngalmekbe ngalbu daluk.\
\\xe The old peole were looking for her, but they didn\'92t find her, that woman.\
\\cf kobahkobanj, kobokohbanj, kobohkobanj, kobakohbanj, kobohbanj\
\\ce plural form\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx kohbanj\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Old woman.\
\\ng There is great variation in the plural forms of this noun which dispenses with the noun class prefix. This means the plural form no longer explicitly marks gender (i.e. a group of elderly males, females or mixed gender group).\
\\cf kobahkobanj, kobokohbanj, kobohkobanj, kobohbanj, kohbahkohbanj, kobakohbanj\
\\ce plural form\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx kohbanj\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Old man.\
\\ng There is great variation in the plural forms of this noun which dispenses with the noun class prefix. This means the plural form no longer explicitly marks gender (i.e. a group of elderly males, females or mixed gender group).\
\\cf kobahkobanj, kobokohbanj, kobohkobanj, kobohbanj, kohbahkohbanj, kobakohbanj\
\\ce plural form\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx kokbabi\
\\ps n.\
\\de person or animal which stares hard at OBJ or watches continuously\
\\xv Kuluyhkuluy kokbabi, kannahnan.\
\\xe The tawny frogmouth is a big-eyed staring thing, it watches us continually.\
\\sy mimbabi\
\
\\lx kokbo\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re cycad conferta\
\\re rock country cycad\
\\sd plant\
\\de cycad which grows in the rock country\
\\sc Cycas sp.\
\\xv Man-kokbo yiman ka-yime man-kobinj. Ka-wohbelbme kure kun-bad.\
\\xe The rock cycad is similar to a fern fv:man-kobinj in that it also attaches itself half way up on rocks.\
\\xv An-kokbo arri-dong djornno arri-marnbun.\
\\xe We pound the rock cycad fruit and turn it into a mashed substance.\
\\sc Cycas conferta\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\p DSC01593.jpg, ankokbo_cycads1Barradj.jpg, DSC00098\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kokkorrolorrol\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de rooster\
\
\\lx kokok\
\\ps n.\
\\de older brother (address and referent), EB\
\
\\lx kokok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg., 1.My older brother, your nephew, you are my uncle.\
\\cn na-kokok\
\\sn 2\
\\de My older brother, your fv:kakkak, you are my fv:kakkak.\
\\cn na-mulebe.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kokok\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term eg., My nephew, your older brother, you are my nephew.\
\\cn kokok.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kolbbe\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate.\
\
\\lx kolbborn\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de dilly bag, tightly woven and used for collection of wild honey.\
\\cf see fv:bulbbe\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx koldan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge without\
\\re be without\
\\re deprived of\
\\de have nothing, be without, be wanting a sharable resource\
\\xv Ngayi nga-koldanj.\
\\xe I've got nothing.\
\\xv A: La mani kun-mim? Ngarr-ngu kun-mim. B: Makka mulahwarre ka-madjyikoldanj. Ngarr-bawo la bonj, bonj\
manekke ngarr-nguneng.\
\\xe A: What about the eyes? Let's eat the eyes. B: That'll leave your sister (fi:kun-derbi term) with nothing (in her dilly bag). Let's leave that\
and just eat what we've got here.\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kole\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\va (m)an-korle, koleno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge spear\
\\re spear\
\\ng incorporable\
\\de spear or spear shaft, more specifically a spear made with a shaft made from Arnhem Land bamboo fi:Bambusa_arnhemica\
\\xv Koleno man-kole kunekke yimeninj munguyh bene-nameninj  manekke bene-nameng bene-kole-namehnameng rowk\
wanjh  bene-nameng bene-rohrokmeng bene-korlhmibom, "Ah, kamak."\
\\xe With their spears, they organised them, putting them all together, they got all their spears and put them into their spear throwers ready.\
They tested them by holding them up with the spear thrower "OK good."\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Bambusa.arnhemica\
\\re fi:Bambusa_arnhemica\
\\de Arnhem Land bamboo\
\\xv Arri-dolkkani an-kole arri-bunjyikani. Kurebeh budj, Marlkawo-beh Ankung Djang-beh. Arri-yikani ankole.\
\\xe We would set off carrying bundles of bamboo. From the bush, Marlkawo or Ankung Djang. We went to get bamboo.\
\\sc Bambusa arnhemica\
\\un Spear types all have their respective names but fv:(m)an-kole means either the plant fi:Bambusa_arnhemica or a spear made from this\
plant. The semantics of this word has also shifted to a generic sense of 'a spear of any type'. Kune dialect also uses the alternative form\
fv:koleno.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\sd plant\
\\pdn kk = bokkardji\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kole\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de bamboo\
\\sc Bambusa arnhemica\
\\ee used for spear shafts. The Kuninjku used to obtain shafts by trade from Kun-djeyhmi people to the\
west.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kolh\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cocky.apple\
\\re cocky apple tree\
\\re fi:Planchonia_careya\
\\de cocky apple tree\
\\sc Planchonia careya\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx -kolh-\
\\de water\
\\ng attested only as incorporated compound or with third person possessor suffix as fv:kolhno\
\\xv Yim-kolhka!\
\\xe Bring the water here!\
\\xv Ka-kolhyo.\
\\xe There's water (there).\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= -bo-\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kolhbidbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de rising of the tide\
\\an kolhdurndeng\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kolhbidjihbidjibme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swirling water of a strong current\
\\sy bo-widjuwidju\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kolhbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de poison fish with ichthycides derived from various plants. The leaves of poisonous plants are gathered\
and pounded and then placed into waterholes. The dead fish then rise to the surface.\
\\sn 2\
\\de be struck with illness by the rainbow serpent when near water after eating meat and not removing\
traces of fat or the smell of the food from around one's mouth.\
\\xv Mayh ngan-kolhbom, konbib nga-nguneng minj nga-rrangbarurremeninj fi:tap nga-wam nga-bonguneng.\
\\xe The rainbow serpent struck me (with illness) because when I ate some corned beef I didn't ritually rub\
my mouth (with sand) before drinking out of the tap.\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kolhdeno\
\\ps n.\
\\de new shoot sprouting out from a plant\
\\xv Manekke man-kerrnge ka-kolhdebebme ku-rrulkbeh.\
\\xe This is a new shoot coming out of the tree.\
\
\\lx kolhkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de take water\
\\sy bokan\
\\ng fv:-kolh- meaning water, bound root\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= -bokan\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kolhkol\
\\ps adv.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de today, now\
\\pde bolkki\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kolhmibun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de shake or shuffle something to move it into a correct position such as when holding a spear and spear\
thrower together. Also when playing the string game 'cat's craddle', the term is used to describe the\
manipulation of the string between the fingers in order to tighten up and properly show the string figure.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kolhngun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de drink\
\\uv E\
\\sy bongun\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kolihme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de make chopping sound with an axe\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde derhme.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kolkbam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kolkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de chop with an axe\
\\xv Kurebeh yim-kolkmen kondabeh ngam-kolkme.\
\\xe (words to a fv:wurruwurrumi style song) You chop from that side and I'll chop from this side.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kolng\
\\va korlng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Northern kentia palm.\
\\sc Hydriastele ramsayi\
\\pdn kk = korlod\
\
\\lx Kolobarr\
\\va kolobbarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge antilopine.kangaroo\
\\re antilopine kangaroo (male)\
\\de male antilopine kangaroo\
\\xv Kolobarr ka-mawudme, ngalengman karndayh ka-djarrwahme.\
\\xe The male antilopine kangaroo hops as in fv:ka\'96mawudme and the female is said to fv:ka-djarrwahme\'92 [note gender specific hopping verbs for this species].\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I= karndakidj, E, Djnj= kalaba\
\\sc Macropus antilopinus\
\\dt 26/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx Kolobarr Kabokbok\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de A section of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek, around 9km south of the crossing on the Gunbalanya-Nabarlek road and directly south of Mabangkarak Hill. It has significance as an Aboriginal walking route (Kunmayimbuk to Mikkinj) and a camping place. Lit. fv:Kolobarr \'91male antilopine kangaroo\'92 fv:Ka-bok-bok \'91It-track-track\'92.\
\\xv Kolobarr Kabokbok konda an-barrarn man-kabo.\uc0\u8232 \\xe Kolobarr Kabokbok is a creek in this gorge.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kololome\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de buzzing of bees\
\\sd bees&honey\
\
\\lx kolomborr\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge eucalypt.sp.\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_arnhemensis\
\\de sandstone country Eucalyptus bloodwood\
\\sc Eucalyptus arnhemensis\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kolung\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de go down, descend 2. return to camp after leaving a place of ceremony.\
\\xv Yi-kolu warde yi-mankan!\
\\xe Get down or you'll fall.\
\
\\lx koluyhwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lift or carry something down, take down\
\\xv Rapunzel yim-mud-koluyhwerrimen!\
\\xe Rapunzel, throw down your hair!\
\
\\lx kolyohkolyohme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de call out 'kolyoh' as part of the Lorrkkon ceremony.\
\
\\lx kom\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stand from the neck up\
\\xv Ka-kom mayh kabene-mirrkmarren Dilebang.\
\\xe The rainbow serpents heads stand there facing each other at Dilebang.\
\
\\lx kom\
\\pr kun-\
\\va komno\
\\ps n.\
\\de neck\
\\pdn kk = kun-kumadj.\
\
\\lx komboh\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Purple-spotted.gudgeon\
\\re fi:Mogurnda_adspersa\
\\de Purple-spotted gudgeon \
\\xv Komboh dilhdilhmiken, duwa nakkan.\
\\xe The purple-spotted gudgeon has spots and is fv:duwa patrimoiety.\
\\sc Mogurnda adspersa\
\\sn 2\
\\ge northern.carp.gudgeon\
\\re northern carp gudgeon\
\\re fi:Hypseleotris_simplex\
\\de Northern carp gudgeon\
\\sc Hypseleotris simplex\
\\sd fish\
\\sn 3\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re grass sp.\
\\re fi:Pseudopogonatherum_contortum\
\\de Kind of native annual grass that has the same name as the gudgeon fish because the grass seeds at the same time when the fish are plentiful in creeks and rivers.\
\\sc Pseudopogonatherum contortum\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/Dec/2013\
\
\\lx komborloh\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bloodwood.sp.\
\\re paper-fruited bloodwood species\
\\re bloodwood sp.\
\\re fi:Corymbia_polysciada\
\\de kind of paper-fruited bloodwood tree with scaly grey tessalated lower bark which gives way to smooth white or pale grey bark on upper trunk and branches.\
\\en yirridjdja moiety\
\\sy djanorro\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_polysciada (formerly fi:Eucalyptus_clavigera).\
\\et Probably fv:kom, 'neck' and Rembarrnga fv:borloh, 'tree'.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kombukdowen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re be thirsty\
\\de Have dry throat, be thirsty.\
\
\\lx kombukyiwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re make someone thirsty\
\\re cause thirst\
\\de Cause someone to thirst, make throat dry (of humans or animals).\
\\xv Ngurrurdu ka-ngun balad kabi-kombukyiwe ka-re wanjh kukku ka-bongun.\
\\xe Emus eat white clayish soil and it makes them thirsty and so they go and drink after eating it.\
\
\\lx komburr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de bands of string worn around the neck as a mortuary rite.\
\
\\lx komdadje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de initiate somebody into a particular ceremony\
\
\\lx komdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be initiated, have knowledge about a ceremony\
\\an komyak\
\
\\lx komdukkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de tie around neck\
\\pdn kk = kumadj-durrbidme\
\
\\lx komrdawh\
\\ps n.\
\\re northern snake-necked turtle\
\\de Northern snake-necked turtle.\
\\xv Yoh kalawan la borlokko birri-nguyi kalawan nungan karrangbulurlhme, komrdawh, Bulkay.\
\\xe Yes, they ate goanna and water pythons, and goannas, the mangrove monitor and northern snake-necked turtles there at Bulkay.\
\\sc Chelodina rugosa\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W, Djnj= ngalmangeyi, Kdj= almangeyi\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 16/May/2014\
\
\\lx Komdjurle\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de small hill in fv:Kurulk clan estate.\
\
\\lx komhkomhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge move further\
\\re move along further\
\\de Move along further on a route, take the next leg of a walking route.\
\\xv Malayi karri-komhkomhme kanjdji karri-re.\
\\xe Tomorrow we'll continue on further and go downstream.\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx komkarnkarn\
\\ps adj.\
\\de skinny neck\
\\xv Na-kom-karnkarn mimih.\
\\xe The mimi has a skinny neck.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx komkare\
\\ps n.\
\\de a person well acquainted with ceremony, fully initiated\
\
\\lx komkerrnge\
\\ps n\
\\de an initiate or person newly introduced to ceremony\
\
\\lx kommang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de murder someone by sorcery by taking blood out of their throat.\
\
\\lx kommelkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de adam's apple, voice box\
\\xv Kommelkwarre minj karri-bekkan ka-wokdi.\
\\xe He has a gravel voice we can't hear him speaking.\
\\sy komolorrk-kimuk\
\
\\lx kommolorrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\de adams apple\
\
\\lx Komnud\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate on the bank of Marrkolidjban creek.\
\
\\lx komnud\
\\ps n.\
\\de phlegm\
\
\\lx komolorrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de windpipe, 'adams apple'\
\
\\lx komorlo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de cattle egret\
\\sc Ardea alba, Ardea ibis\
\\ee This name refers to all of the white egrets.\
\\uv W?=kabakaba\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx komrdawh\
\\ps n.\
\\re snake-necked turtle\
\\re northern snake-necked turtle\
\\re fi:Chelodina_rugosa\
\\de Northern snake-necked turtle\
\\sc Chelodina rugosa\
\\pdn kk= ngalngarelyi\
\\uv W= ngalmangeyi, Kdj= almangeyi\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx komwelebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de call out in fright or surprise aaaah!\
\
\\lx komyak\
\\ps n.\
\\de an uninitiated person, someone who has no knowledge of a particular ceremony\
\\xv nga-kom-yak\
\\xe I'm uninitiated.\
\\an nga-kom-di\
\
\\lx konam\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps n. pred.\
\\de height\
\\xv Bale ka-konam?\
\\xe How tall is s/he?\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx konamkuyeng\
\\ps adj.\
\\de tall\
\\xv Na-konamkuyeng.\
\\xe He is tall.\
\\an dedjdjumbung\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kondabeh\
\\ps loc.dem.\
\\de from this side\
\\xv Kurebeh yim-kolkmen kondabeh ngam-kolkme.\
\\xe (words to a fv:wurruwurrumi style song) You chop from that side and I'll chop from this side.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kondamdjarrberlkerren.\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de make hand print\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bid-kurrmerren\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kondamkuykbonghmerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de make hand stencil\
\\xv Karri-kondamkuykbonghmerren.\
\\xe We make a hand stencil.\
\\pde bid-kuykmerren.\
\
\\lx kondanj\
\\va konda, kondah\
\\ps dem. loc.\
\\sn 1\
\\de here\
\\xv Konda yimray kornbayeng.\
\\xe Come here my friend.\
\\sn 2\
\\de stay\
\\xv Ngudda bale yire? Ngayi kondanj.\
\\xe Where are you going? I'm staying here.\
\
\\lx kondorr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de\
\\de Saratoga, Northern Spotted Barramundi\
\\sc Scleropages jardini\
\\uv duwa moiety lect name for fv:ngaldadmurrng.\
\\sy ngaldadmurrng\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx konemkuyenghmen\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lengthen\
\\xv Ken, nga-konemkuyenghmeng.\
\\xe Oops, I've made it too long.\
\
\\lx kono\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de flower\
\\xv Kurruk ku-kak ka-rrolkan, ka-wohre, kono ka-ngun.\
\\xe The mud mussels fly around at night eating flowers.\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= nguyno.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kong\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kongno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable\
\\ge stringybark\
\\re bark of fi:Eucalyptus_tetrodonta\
\\de bark of fi:Eucalyptus_tetrodonta\
\\xv An-burluddak ka-bun kongno kun-kong ka-bun wanjh ka-kurrmehkrrme ka-welengwirlarrkkabun\
\\xe She [the emu] hits the stringbark tree to knock off the bark which she places to make a nest so the eggs can be incubated.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx kong\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\va kongno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge stringybark\
\\re bark strips off stringybark tree\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_tetrodonta bark strips\
\\ng incorporable\
\\de outer strips of bark from the stringybark fi:Eucalyptus_tetrodonta\
\\sy madjdjul\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kongibun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de feel compassion\
\\xv Ngayi kongibun ngudda.\
\\xe I feel sorry for you.\
\
\\lx kongko\
\\pr man-\
\\va man-koko\
\\ps n.\
\\ge peanut.tree\
\\re peanut tree\
\\re fi:Sterculia_quadrifida\
\\de Peanut tree or red-fruited kurrajong. The tree grows in rainforest and vine thickets, up to 10m tall, flowers are greenish-white in fv:kurrung to fv:kudjewk seasons. The name refers to both the tree and the edible seeds from the orange seed pods. There are up to 8 edible seeds in the pods which are similar in taste to peanuts.\
\\sc Sterculia quadrifida\
\\ee In Kundjeyhmi small individuals are called fv:an-gogo, very large trees are called fv:an.garralarlhmanj. Bark of small individuals makes good string.\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 16/Sep/2012\
\
\\lx konguyno\
\\va kun-konguy\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\sd plant\
\\de flowers, especially those of paperbarks, eucalypts and other trees which attract honey bees, flying foxes\
and other flower-eating animals\
\\sy kono, nguyno\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= nguyno, E= kono\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx konguyno\
\\va kun-konguy\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\sd plant\
\\de flowers, especially those of paperbarks, eucalypts and other trees which attract honey bees, flying foxes and\
other flower-eating animals\
\\sy kono, nguyno\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= nguyno, E= kono\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx konjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\de red ant bed\
\\sy kambe\
\
\\lx Konjdja Na-kuyengkuyeng Ka-rri\
\\lit termite mound long-long it-stands\
\\ps n. place\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate on Darwin road.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx konjkonj\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de ghost, malevolent spirit\
\\pde wayarra.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kord\
\\ps n. (incorporated)\
\\de orifice (vulgar), 'hole'\
\\xv Yi-kordbanj.\
\\xe You smell like shit!\
\\xv Yi-kordwern.\
\\xe You fart too much.\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 01/Jan/2013\
\
\\lx kord\
\\ps n.\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ge shit\
\\re shit\
\\de Shit.\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur E, W, I= kurdduk\
\\dt 01/Jan/2013\
\
\\lx kordang\
\\pr na-, ngal-\
\\va na-kordangyi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge magic.man\
\\re spiritual healer\
\\re spiritual healer\
\\re clever man\
\\de Man/woman who has special spiritual fv:man-kordang power to heal others or effect supernatural acts.\
\\sy marrkidjbu\
\\dt 01/Jan/2013\
\
\\lx kordang\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spirit.power\
\\re spiritual power\
\\re magical power\
\\re supernatural power\
\\de Supernatural power, mainly to heal but also to be able to see spirit beings or to compose new songs through supernatural revelation.\
\\xv Kunkudji yoy kore kurralk wanjh mankordang birriwong wayahwayarra.\
\\xe While he lay on the grass asleep the ghosts gave him the power to be a clever man.\
\\xv Narin minj birribekkayinj kamkadjuy mankordang kunrak.\
\\xe The snakes didn't hear the magical fire approaching.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kordbeng\
\\pr yi-\
\\ps pred. n.\
\\ge shit.brains\
\\re shit-for-brains (an insult)\
\\re sex maniac (a vulgar term)\
\\de A vulgar swear word meaning 'shit-for-brains' or 'orifice brains' with the implication of 'sex-obsessed' (not in polite usage).\
\\xv Ngudda, yikordbeng!\
\\xe You, you're sex obsessed!\
\\dt 01/Jan/2013\
\
\\lx kordberr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge golden-backed.tree-rat\
\\re fi:Mesembriomys_macrurus\
\\re golden-backed tree-rat\
\\de Golden-backed tree-rat. Now thought to be locally extinct in Kakadu and Western Arnhem Land.\
\\sc Mesembriomys macrurus\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 01/Jan/2013\
\
\\lx kordbolbok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge frog\
\\re frog (generic)\
\\re fi:Litorea_caerulea\
\\de Green tree frog, also generic for all frogs.\
\\sc Litorea caerulea\
\\uv W\
\\ur I, Kdj, E= djaddi\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\
\\lx kordderhwarrbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge shit\
\\re shit a large pile of faeces\
\\de defaecate leaving a big pile of shit, usually used as a form of swearing or insult and not in polite usage\
\\sy korddjabdjabname\
\
\\lx korddol\
\\ps n.\
\\ge owl\
\\re southern boobook\
\\re fi:Ninox_novaeseelandiae\
\\de Southern boobook.\
\\uv W\
\\ur I, E= djorrbok\
\\sc Ninox novaeseelandiae\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 29/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx kordduk\
\\va kurdduk\
\\ps n.\
\\de faeces, shit\
\
\\lx kordidjme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de swear at OBJ with obscenity or mention of a person's cross-sex sibling\
\\sy -kukmamang\
\
\\lx kordildil\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de green plum\
\\sc Buchanania obovata\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-dudjmi\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kordno\
\\ps n.\
\\de faeces, shit\
\
\\lx kordo\
\\cf see fv:ngalkordo\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kordomkordom\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename in Kodwalewale estate\
\\de Placename in Kodwalewale estate\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx kordow\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re cottonwood tree\
\\re fi:Bombax_ceiba\
\\de Cottonwood tree.\
\\sc Bombax ceiba\
\\uv E, I\
\\sn 2\
\\re milkwood tree\
\\re fi:Alstonia_actinophylla\
\\de Milkwood.\
\\sc Alstonia actinophylla\
\\ee Used for carving e.g.art market sculptures and making canoes.\
\\xv Birri-marnbuyi wubbunj kun-dulkbe kordow.\
\\xe They used to make canoes out of Cottonwood trees. (E)\cf3 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\sd plant\
\\dt 14/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx kordow\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kapok tree\
\\sc Bombax ceiba\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx Kordukordu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx korl\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Nymphaea.roots\
\\re fi:Nymphaea waterlily roots\
\\de roots of fi:Nymphaea waterlilies\
\\sc Nymphaea spp.\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 20/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx korlanglang\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge swamp.bloodwood\
\\re swamp bloodwood\
\\re fi:Corymbia_ptychocarpa\
\\de swamp bloodwood\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_ptychocarpa (possibly also fi:C._phoenicea and fi:C._porrecta).\
\\uv I, E, W (man-); Kdj, Djnj (an-)\
\\ur Kdj (syn.)= an-bamberre\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Corymbia.setosa\
\\re fi:Corymbia_setosa\
\\de red-flowering variety of fi:Corymbia_setosa (which may also have white or pink flowers, but only the red flowering variety is called fv:an-korlanglang ).\
\\ee Ridged fruit, red flower, rough fibrous tessalated brown/grey bark.\
\\ee The fruit contains edible seeds fv:dorddord.\
\\sy man-dangdang\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Korlborlkayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\de place in fv:Kidbulmaniyimarra clan estate, little creek near fv:Mimanjarr visited for fishing\
\\xv Kure Korlborlkayo boddowk ngarrih-mang.\
\\xe Korlborlkayo is where we get little spangled grunter fish.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx korlh\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de cocky apple\
\\sc Planchonia careya\
\\uv I= 1.man-wodberr, 2. djarnhba.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx korlhbon (check retroflexion)\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de swag, possessions\
\\sy kun-madj\
\
\\lx korlh-korlh\
\\ps n.\
\\de stars\
\\xv Korlh-korlh daluk birri-ni.\
\\xe The stars were once women.\
\
\\lx Korlinjngarr\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A boulder with a rock shelter on the plain just east of Kurrudjmuk hill. The shelter contains rock paintings, a cache of skeletal remains and other objects such as stone tools. The bones are said to be those of an elder brother of Marrirn man Timothy Nadjowh, possibly named Mawil. Along with the bones there is a sacred Mardayin wooden object, which must not be viewed by women or children. The site is under a high level of restriction to non-Aboriginal people. Mythologically significant site associated with Namorrorddo as well as dingo and bandicoot. An associated site named Djibbarrwaka may be nearby.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx korlkkorlk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ghost.gum\
\\re ghost gum\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_grandifolia\
\\re fi:fi:Corymbia_bella\
\\de Certain white-barked eucalypt trees such as the large-leafed cabbage gum and the ghost gum.\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_grandifolia, fi:Corymbia_bella\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= man-korlokkorlo, Djnj= an-korlokkorlo\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 22/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx korlkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de chop a tree down\
\\cf korlkmerren\
\\ce cut oneself\
\
\\lx korlng\
\\va kolng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kentia palm\
\\sc Hydriastele ramsayi\
\\pdn kk = korlod\
\
\\lx Korlngkadi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Not far from Yimayhyirud on Liverpool River plain between Mumeka and Marrkolidjban. Seasonal\
fishing camp.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Korlobidahdah\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Outstation community on Cadell River in stone country south of Maningrida on the road to Bulman and Katherine. Also the estate name or fv:kun-ngeybadjan for this region.\
\\ee duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx korlobbarr\
\\va korlobarr, kolobbarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge antilopine\
\\re antilopine kangaroo (male)\
\\re kangaroo sp., antilopine kangaroo (male only)\
\\re fi:Macropus_antlopinus\
\\de Male antilopine kangaroo. A young female is fv:karndalbburru and the adult female is fv:karndayh.\
\\sc Macropus antilopinus\
\\uv Name said by Toby Gangele to be from 'Top Country', prob. Dangbon.\
\\sy gandagidj  \
\\xv Barrih-nguni djilidjilih, korlobbarr bani-nang.\
\\xe As they were eating cane grass they (both) saw a male antilopine kangaroo.\
\\xv Korlobbarr ba-rrumedjuhmiyindi.\
\\xe The antilopine wallaroo is dipping his lower back in the water.\
\\uv E, Kdj, Dangbon\
\\sd mammals\
\\dt 17/Feb/2010\
\
\\lx korlobok\
\\lx korlobbok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge diamond.dove\
\\re diamond dove\
\\re fi:Geophelia_cuneata\
\\de Diamond dove.\
\\sc Geophelia cuneata\
\\sy Kdj= mimwirdwird\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 23/Aug/2012\
\
\\lx korloddoddok\
\\va korloddoddo\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dove.sp\
\\re peaceful dove\
\\re fi:Geopelia_placida\
\\de Peaceful dove.\
\\sc Geopelia placida\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 28/May/2014\
\
\\lx korlokkorlo\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge ghost.gum\
\\re ghost gum\
\\re fi:Corymbia_bella\
\\de Ghost gum.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge bloodwood.sp\
\\re large-leafed cabbage gum\
\\re fi:Corymbia_grandifolia\
\\de large-leafed cabbage gum\
\\xv Njamed mak kure korlokkorlo kono ka-ngun. Nakka yi-na ngokkoyi dakahdahkendoy.\
\\xe The bees also eat the [nectar] of white-barked gum tree flowers. Look, you can see it has already filled up the hive [with nectar].\
\\ng The illustrative sentence shows the name of this tree without a noun class prefix as the speaker is a Kune/Dangbon speaker and Dangbon does not use n. This usage has influenced Kune as in the above example.\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_grandifolia, fi:Corymbia_bella\
\\uv Djnj, E\
\\ur I= man-korlkkorlk\
\\sd plant\
\\so Ruby Bilindja\
\\dt 22/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx korlokkorlok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge masturbation\
\\re masturbation\
\\de Mastrubation, wanking.\
\\xv Korlokkorlok ka-ngun.\
\\xe He is masturbating.\
\\dt 02/Mar/2014\
\
\\lx Korlongkorlo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kidbulmaniyimarra clan estate, fv:djang (sacred site) for one-legged brolga.\
\
\\lx korlonj\
\\ps n.\
\\de daughter, son (address)\
\
\\lx korn\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kornno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de testicles 2. groin (of male or female)\
\
\\lx kornbayeng\
\\ps interj.\
\\de An expression of affection used after someone is impressed with a particular action or as a term of\
endearment. It has no rude or vulgar connotation as the literal meaning may suggest. One informant\
gave the gloss 'friend'. It can also be used as an expression of happiness (eg. excitement after a\
successful hunt)\
\\xv A:Ngayi ngare djarre, kaluk ngam-durndeng. B:Ya, yim-durnde, yi-kornbayeng.\
\\xe I'm going a long way away, but after I'll come back. Yes, my friend, you come back.\
\\xv Wabwabmeng, konda, konda, konda kundjangmelmeng drrr murrngbakkeng.\
"Nga-kornbayeng nga-kornbayeng nga-kornbayeng."\
\\xe He snuck up further, further, further, poised to spear and drrr he broke its bone (kangaroo). Yipee,\
yipee, yipee (I've speared it).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Korndo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de small billabong in fv:Kunanganja clan area not far from the large billabong at\
fv:Kungorobu.\
\\dt 04/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx korndo\
\\pr kun\
\\va ka-korndo\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge clay\
\\re clay type\
\\de kind of clay, light in colour\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng incorporable\
\\xv Kun-korndo ku-rorrbo ka-yo.\
\\xe Clay is found in open areas.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd geographic\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 04/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx korndjobke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge castrate\
\\re castrate\
\\de castrate\
\\xv Duruk wanjh kaben-korndjobke ba ngal-daluk minj ka-yawmang na-wern.\
\\xe She [the vet] will castrate the dogs, so the female dogs will not have lots of puppies.\
\\dt 30/Nov/2011\
\
\\lx korndobame\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge bright clay\
\\re clay be bright\
\\de\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Ka-korndobame.\
\\xe The clay is bright in colour (grey).\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd geographic\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 04/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx Korndom\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx korndord\
\\ps n.\
\\de good hunter who specialises in one particular animal\
\\sy mimdord.\
\
\\lx korn-dowkke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de injure OBJ's testicles (ie. bust someone's balls), kick OBJ in the groin.\
\\xv Na-kudji birri-korn-dowkkeng wanjh mim-borledmeng doweng.\
\\xe They kicked one in the groin and his eyes rolled and he collapsed.\
\
\\lx korndjerrh\
\\pr kun\
\\va korndjerrhno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de scrotum\
\
\\lx korndjerrhno\
\\va kun-korndjerrh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de scrotum\
\\xv Karndakidj ka-korndjerrh-kuyeng.\
\\xe The Antilopine kangaroo has a long scrotum.\
\
\\lx korndjin\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de unidentified shrub (small oblong/oval-shaped leaves.\
\\ee Manme kah-di, ka-mim-di yiman man-djurlukkun.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kornkumo\
\\ps n.\
\\de referent term for someone else's father\
\\xv Nakkan kornkumo nuye.\
\\xe That is his father.\
\
\\lx kornkurrnginjno\
\\ps n.\
\\de sweat of groin\
\
\\lx kornmudno\
\\ps n.\
\\de pubic hair\
\
\\lx Kornnokah\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\lit "At his testicle"\
\\uv D, E\
\\ee "Na-marrkon kenh djangno"\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kornobolo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de agile wallaby\
\\sc Macropus agilis\
\\ee The male is called fv:warradjangkal and the female fv:merlbbe.\
\\pdn kk = njamdjorrhdjorrh\
\\ee REM = barlkkidj (small one)\
\\cf see fv:warradjangkal\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kornobolo Kawankerri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place name in fv:na-Wurrik clan estate which is within the region known as fv:Mandedjkadjang.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx korakkora\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge coleus\
\\re coleus\
\\re fi:Solenostemon_scutellarioides\
\\de coleus\
\\xv An-korakkora nin kangun.\
\\xe The double-barred finch eats (the seeds of) the coleus.\
\\sc Solenostemon scutellarioides\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 22/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx koray\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de bamboo plant 2. bamboo spear\
\\sc Bambusa arnhemica\
\\sy man-kole.\
\\dt 13/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx korodjol\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Corymbia_sp.\
\\re fi:Corymbia (bloodwood) fi:sp.\
\\de Round-leafed bloodwood, a kind of fi:Corymbia (eucalypt bloodwood) tree\
\\sd plant\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_latifolia (also possibly fi:Corymbia_foelscheana)\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx Korokahmang\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Waybburda estate, on Djawonj Creek.\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Korokoro\
\\ps place n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Area along a stretch of the upper East Alligator river between Ngalwanjdjarri and Djurrubu with large areas of open water. Korokoro is almost 60km southeast (upstream) from Cahill's Crossing.  This is a Duwa moiety area, not to be confused with the Yirridjdja moiety area of the same name over 30km to the west on Magela Creek. \
\\sn 2\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region \
\\de Area on Magela Creek, downstream from 'Magela Falls' in the Dakdjam gorge area. Korokoro is about 22km southeast of Jabiru airport, upstream from Ngalalaman.  This is a Yirridjdja moiety area, not to be confused with the Duwa moiety area of the same name over 30km to the east on the East Alligator River.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx koronhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de look back behind\
\\xv Ka-rrolkkan kare ka-nidberren ka-koronhme.\
\\xe He gets up, off he goes, stops and looks behind. (Words of fv:wurrurrumi song).\
\
\\lx korono\
\\ps n.\
\\ge elongate.thing\
\\re elongated thing, esp. snake\
\\de elongated winding shape e.g. a vine, long plant stem or the body of a snake\
\
\\lx koroyil\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\sn 1\
\\de dividing line used in artwork to segment a painting.\
\\xv Koroyil bim-ken.\
\\xe A dividing line as used in paintings.\
\\sn 2\
\\de ceremonial harness made from strands of acacia string which crosses over the chest and down the\
back. Used in wubarr ceremony.\
\\xv Koroyil birri-djongburrinj Wubarr-ken, birri-koyhbomeng 'koyhbo, koyhbo, koyhbo'.\
\\xe They used to put on ceremonial harnesses for the Wubarr ceremony and call out 'koyhbo, koyhbo,\
koyhbo'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Korrbelak\uc0\u8232 \\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Creek and an open area with a small rocky outcrop in the Djalbangurrk estate. Located in a remote stone country area about 5km east of the upper Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer), however the water flows northeast from here away from the Gumardir. It eventually becomes Kumarringbang Creek (mapped as \'91Manggabor Creek\'92) which flows past Kumarrirnbang outstation. Korrbelak is about 20km northwest of Kabulwarnamyo outstation and just upstream of Kamarangdjabdi.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx korrbuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de common bronzewing\
\\sc Phaps chalcoptera\
\
\\lx korrdjdjok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de rufous owl\
\\sc Ninox rufa\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx korrk\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de Cloth, naga, loincloth, ceremonial exchange cloth, cockrag.\
\\sy manburrba\
\\pde manburrba\
\\pdn This word is used more by Kune dialect speakers such as at Buluhkaduru as an ordinary (ie.\
non-kun-kurrng) word.\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= manburrba\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx korrkke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lance a sore\
\\xv bi-nud-korrkkeng\
\\xe s/he lanced his/her infected sore\
\
\\lx korrkno\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\de membrane, such as the membrane in bat wings and lambalk glider possums.\
\
\\lx korrko\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge paperbark\
\\re silver-leaved paperbark tree\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_argentea\
\\de silver-leaved paperbark tree\
\\ee Flowers of fi:Melaleuca_argentea have nectar that attracts fv:lorlbban bees.\
\\sc Melaleuca argentea\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 22/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx korrkwokdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de (of flying fox wings) to make the flapping noise of flying foxes beating their wings as they fly\
\\xv Ngarri-bekkang ba-korrkwokdi kuluban mulil bu kangokdanj, kondabeh kabirri-dolkkan\
Djorlok kabirrikongun kukak, malahmalayi kabirridurndeng kondah.\
\\xe We heard a mass of flying fox wings beating as they flew from here to Djorlok to eat flowers at night,\
and in the morning they return here.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx korrmo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de seed of pandanus (Pandanus spiralis)\
\\ee a nutty seed eaten, very difficult to extract from the hard fruit.\
\\uv I\
\\uv E =djinkurlk\
\\ee GG=ngal\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx korrngelk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de fish\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djenj\
\\xv Karri-yidokan man-yirrurl ba karri-modme korrngelk karri-yakwan.\
\\xn Karri-yire wakkidj ba karri-mang djenj karri-ngun.\
\\xe Let\'92s go with fishing lines so we can get some fish to eat.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Korrngkorrngbay\
\\ps place n.\
\\re Ceremony ground near Maranboy.\
\\de Ceremony ground at Maranboy Creek, formerly visited by Kundedjnjenghmi people who travelled south from Bininj Kunwok or fv:Mayali country into Jawoyn country to attend fv:Kunabibi ceremonies.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 14/Jan/2016\
\
\\lx korroko\
\\ps adv.\
\\de already, a long time ago\
\
\\lx korrongko\
\\pr nga-, yi-, ka-, na-, (ng)al- etc\
\\ps adj.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sn 1\
\\de many\
\\xv Ngurri-korrongko.\
\\xn Ngurri-wern.\
\\xe There are many of you.\
\\sn 2\
\\de big\
\\pde 1. -wern, 2. -kimuk.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx korrow-korrow\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de blue-winged kookaburra\
\\sc Dacelo leachii\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx korrowan\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge white.currant\
\\re white currant tree\
\\re fi:Flueggea_virosa\
\\de white currant tree \
\\ee Produces an edible berry which turns white when ripe in the wet season.\
\\xv An-korrowan kure kayawal ka-rri, Birulk, Muraba, dulumno, yirridjdja.\
\\xe The white currant tree is found where long yams grow at Birulk in the Muraba hill country in fi:yirridjdja moiety country.\
\\sc Flueggea virosa\
\\sy Djnj= an-ngalele\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\ur Kdj= an-ngalele\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx Kowarrang\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Dalabon patriclan to the south of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Ka-djale kumekke kure ka-bawon yirridjdja man-wurrbbarnbuluken yerre na-marrkuken ka-bebme. Marrku ka-re,\
Kandjarrawali, Kandjarraken,  Kandjarrawali, ka-re Wakmarranjkenwali. Wakmarranjkenwali djuy! An nawu \
na-Kowarrangken bininj ka-yimarnebebme na-Barlbbahken na-Buluken.\
\\xe It keeps going until it leaves fi:yirridjdja moiety country in the Wurrbbarnbulu clan and then becomes Marrku clan. From Marrku it\
becomes Kandjarra and from Kandjarra the next clan is Wakmarranj. From Wakmarranj its a long way! Then you come to those\
people from the Kowarrang clan and then to Barlbbah and the Bulu clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx kowarrang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de echidna\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= ngarrbek\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx koybebke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cause to suffer physical strain (focused on the internal organs, lit. 'make orifice appear').\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx koybebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Experience excessive strain (e.g. when lifting something, lit. 'red colour appears').\
\\xv Yimarnek kuyin-ngorrmey wanjh manekke koybebmeng koybebwam, "Wa, wa\
nga-koybebme, ngurrim-ray, nga-koybebme, nga-koybebme, ngurri-mang."\
\\xe He almost lifted it but then he strained himself, "Wa, wa, I've strained myself, I'm burnt, come and get it for me."\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx koybuk\
\\pr pronominal eg. na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de gentleman, quiet well behaved person who doesn't constantly annoy others or ask for things all the time\
and who behaves maturely at ceremonies.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx koyek\
\\ps locative\
\\de east\
\\xv koyek-beh\
\\xe from the east, easterners.\
\
\\lx koyhbome\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de sing out 'koyhbo', a ceremonial call in the Wubarr ceremony called by women in answer to the men\
who call out 'lidda, lidda, lidda'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx koyhdoy\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de call someone daughter's child ie. grandchild\
\
\\lx koyhmarle\
\\ps n.\
\\de 'stinker', a humorous insult said to someone who has just farted! Not in polite usage.\
\\xv Yi-koyhmarle ngudda!\
\\xe You stinker you!\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx koyhno\
\\ps n.\
\\de resin, such as that found in some plants\
\
\\lx koykoy\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\de sexually promiscuous person\
\\sy djurrkdjurrk (obscene synonym)\
\
\\lx koymud\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge phratry.system\
\\re phratry system\
\\de system of matrilineal phratries used in social organisation consisting of;fv:yarriburrik (fire totem), fv:yarriyarninj (sun totem), fv:yarriwurrkkarr (green ant totem) and fv:yarrikarnkurrk (rock totem). Other categories are sometimes also used which differ amongst the various dialects e.g. fv:man-djarrakbuma (water totem, Kunwinjku dialect)\
\\sy kun-djungunj\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 27/Jul/2010\
\
\\lx koynguneng\
\\pr nga-\
\\ps interj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de 'oh my goodness how delicious', 'yum yum'.\
\\sn 2\
\\de expression of affection\
\
\\lx koy\
\\pr man-\
\\ps adj.\
\\de red\
\\xv Wanjh dolkkang djadberdberd mani man-kuy manekke kah-yo konda kukarlang.\
\\xe Then the red-shouldered parrot got up with that red colour here on his shoulder.\
\\xv Man-koy kabirri-bimbun, yi-nan bim yiman kun-kurlba.\
\\xe They paint red pictures the colour of blood.\
\
\\lx koyo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Fresh Water Crocodile\
\\sc Crocodylus johnstoni\
\\pdn kk = I= ngaldjakdjalarrk\
\\syn modjarrkki, nawulhmu (rare)\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= kumoken, Kdj= modjarrki\
\\ee REM = koyo\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kub\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'Bite the line!'; said after throwing in a fishing line to anticipate a fish taking the bait.\
\
\\lx Kubarledjowoy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Liverpool River crossing\
\
\\lx kubarrarn-djokko\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de narrow passage\
\
\\lx kubba\
\\ps n.\
\\de crowbar\
\\pdn kk = walamurru\
\
\\lx Kubbarra\
\\ps n. place\
\\ge place name\
\\re place in Burnungku clan estate\
\\de place in the Burnungku clan estate on the Maningrida road to Buluh Kaduru\
outstation\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kubbulbulya\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region\
\\de Small billabong east of Magela Creek and downstream from Nawarray. Kubbulbulya is in the vicinity of 15km east-southeast of Jabiru airport.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Kubernebernerre\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Billabong downstream from the dinner camp at the lorrkkon place on Marrkolidjban creek.\
\\dv Kulabbarl darnki kabbal kure lorrkkon kah-di.\
\\ee Kun-bolk duwa.\
\\cf Kunlorrekalurlhdi\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kuberrk\
\\ps loc.\
\\de outside\
\\cf kabirri-kaberrkdi\
\\ce they are all outside\
\\an ku-rurrk\
\
\\lx Kubidjikadjang\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate, 'dadbe djang' north of Korlobidahdah\
\\ee fv:kubidji is the name of a poisonous water snake (DK)\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kubirlingun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place towards Kumarrirnbang\
\\nt check for more information\
\
\\lx Kubokedjerlkkedjerlk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place to the north of Mumeka\
\
\\lx Kubokkorlorl\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in the Tin Camp Creek region\
\\de Savannah and rock country in the upper Tin Camp Creek catchment. There is savanna on a rise leading to a scarp and a large outlier with many large overhangs. The outlier itself is about 11km west-northwest from the confluence of the \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 Rivers.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kubokodj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de Site on an upper branch of Mandedjkadjang Creek (Muralidbar Creek). Regarded as a border area between the Kunukdi and Maburrinj estates. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kubolkbomung\
\\ps n.\
\\de someone else's country, an unknown or unfamiliar place\
\
\\lx kubomung\
\\ps n.\
\\de a stranger to a particular place, a foreigner or someone who has come to a place for the first time.\
\\xv Djabidj Bakoluy konda bu nga-bolkbukkani anu Balanda:. Yi-nan nga-bolk-bukkan\
ngahli ka-re, kubomung beh monidj.\
\\xe Here at Djabidj Bakoluy I've been showing these European people the country. You see here I'm\
showing this woman here, she is a stranger to this place.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kubomerlem\uc0\u8232 \\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site on the Goomadeer River, on its upper branch before the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 River. Literally: Ku- \'91LOCative\'92-bo \'91water\'92 \'96merlem \'91belly\'92. It lies around 6km south-southwest of the confluence, near where sandstone country encroaches on the river from the west. It is situated just north of the Kunweyberrk estate, outside its borders. According to anthropologist Frank McKeown it was a site where women and children would wait while men performed the Wubarr ceremony at a nearby site he recorded as \'91Kakenbibakdi\'92.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kubongokngok\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Marlirri clan estate\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kubowalme\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place near fv:Kudjalrdordo in fv:Kardbam/Barrbin company clan estate.\
\
\\lx Kubukkan\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de 'Big place name' or region in fv:na-mirwi country which includes a number of smaller places.\
\\so BB-B\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kubulurr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Typhonium_spp.\
\\re Arum plant\
\\de Kind of herbaceous plant of the Arum family (as are fi:Amorphophallus_spp.) with a subterranean corm which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is rendered edible. The leaves and stem are removed and the corm roasted in hot coals. It is then pounded with a stone for a long time to get the juice out, washed with water and pounded again. The corm pulp must turn from white to a black colour before it is edible.\
\\ee There is considerable variation in shape and size of Arum plants and as a result, the various dialects of Bininj Kunwok have various names for the different sizes of the same species. Larger specimens of Typhonium are called fv:kubulurr and the smaller sizes called fv:man-danek or fv:man-djanek.\
\\sc Typhonium cochlear, Typhonium flagelliforme, Typhonium russell-smithii\
\\sy (m)an-djanek, (m)an-danek, madjalkbadj\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx Kubumi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Big place name on Mann River in na-Kulmarru clan estate. Large rock pools are Rainbow Serpent\
sacred sites. Kubumi is a place of exceptional physical beauty.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kuburrburr\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kudjaldordo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Barrbinj clan estate east of Marrkolidjban on a large creek. Seasonal camp for fishing.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kudjalrdordo\
\\ps n. prop\
\\sd placename\
\\de area east of Marrkolidjban in Barrbinj clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kudjam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate.\
\
\\lx Kudjarnngal\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place near Manmoyi outstation, site of white clay fv:delek in the bank of a creek. The placename literally means 'in the fork of the branch'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kudjarngu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan located near the confluence of the Mann and Liverpool Rivers.\
\\xv Yimayhyirud ka-bolkkudjarngu.\
\\xe The place Yimayhyirud belongs to the Kudjarngu clan.\
\\ee This clan and another neighbouring one, Mikngalkken are now both extinct. The Kudjarngu clan is also sometimes referred to by the\
name Kungarrekuwern.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kudjed\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pandanus.seed\
\\re pandanus seeds\
\\de edible seeds of pandanus fruit\
\\ee Pandanus seeds must be extracted with some difficulty from the wedge-shaped woody clusters of the composite fruit heads.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= korrmo\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kudjeddjirr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place north of Kakodbebuldi on Mann River\
\
\\lx kudjek\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge pandanus.sp.\
\\re rock pandanus\
\\re fi:Pandanus_basedowii\
\\de Rock pandandus (Basedow's pandanus)\
\\uv W\
\\ur I,E= man-ngokngo, Djnj= an-ngohngo, Kdj= an-morre\
\\sn 2\
\\ge dry.country.pandanus\
\\re dry country pandanus\
\\de Pandanus fruit nuts of pandanus that grows in dry savanna fv:manberrk as opposed to those growing near water. In Kunwinjku, this name is used for fi:Pandanus_basedowii.\
\\uv E\
\\dt 03/Sep/2012\
\
\\lx Kudjekbinj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Estate name and name for an outstation.\
\
\\lx kudjewk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de wet season\
\
\\lx kudji\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de self\
\\xv Ngudda yi-kudji yim-wam?\
\\xe Did you come by yourself?\
\\sn 2\
\\de a few, not many\
\\xv Ngarri-kudji ngarri-wam.\
\\xe Only a few of us went.\
\\sn 3\
\\de again, one more time\
\\xv Kun-kudji ngurri-borrkkemen.\
\\xe Dance one more time.\
\\xv Man-kudji kano.\
\\xe Give me one more (food).\
\\xv Ma na-kudji!\
\\xe Right, one more time [repetition of a song].\
\\dt 21/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kudji\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps time adv.\
\\de once, one more time\
\\xv Kun-kudji birri-borrkkeng kure Manawukan.\
\\xe Once they were dancing at Maningrida.\
\
\\lx Kudjibunjbunj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Straight and wide section of the Gumardir River (the upper east branch of the Goomadeer) in the Maburrinj estate. At Kudjibunjbunj the river flows from the southeast to the northwest, a couple of kilometres before it joins the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 branch of the river. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kudjidmi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de billabong in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate near the short cut road between the Darwin road and the\
Kakodbebuldi road.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kudjihme\
\\ps v.i/t.\
\\de put in place for a long time or forever, place as 'dreaming' as in creation times\
\\xv Bonj wanjh ben-bom bonj ben-kudjihmeng, bonj, kamak.\
\\xe That's it, he destroyed them and placed them there forever (as dreaming) that's all OK.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kudjihme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place and leave forever\
\\xv Bonj wanjh ben-bom bonj ben-kudjihmeng, bonj, kamak.\
\\xe Then he killed them and left them there forever, the end.\
\
\\lx kudjikan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de carry a few things\
\\xv Ngarri-kudji-kan man-kole.\
\\xe We'll carry a few spears.\
\
\\lx kudjirri\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de teeth\
\\pde kun-yidme.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kudjmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de remove an elongate object from that in which it is embedded, eg. get a splinter out\
\\xv Ah yowyowmeng rowk wanjh belngdanj rowk mirrhno birri-mirrh-kudj-mey.\
\\xe The fluid came out and the swelling all went down and they took out the sharp splinter.\
\\xv Mimih kom-karnkarn minj ka-bebme wardi kabi-kom-kudjmang kun-kurra.\
\\xe The mimih has a slender neck and cannot come out into the open lest the wind wrench his neck out (of\
his body).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kudjongkolo\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Named site about 300m downstream from Namardan Kardayi\
\\cf Namardan Kardayi\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kudjurlekudjamun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re place near Marrkolidjban\
\\de place in Marrkolidjban estate but held 'in company' with owners of the Namokardabu estate. Site of mosquito dreaming.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kudjumarndi\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Estate name in the Myra Falls area and the name for the place known in English as Myra Falls.\
\\sd estate\
\
\\lx kurdadji\
\\ps n.\
\\re sorceror\
\\de A sorceror from southern groups who is known as an \'91emu foot spirit\'92. He travels around killing people and hides his tracks by attaching shoes made from feathers to his feet. The name is cognate with the famous kadaitcha of central Australian fame.\
\\xv Kurdadji, denge ngurrurdu waralno, bininj, mudno ka-mang namekke ka-dengename ka-molkre kan-danjbun wanjh. Barunga walem ngamed Marrarengka, Worlowk ka-re.\
\\xe The fv:kurdadji killer is an emu foot spirit, a man who gets feathers and attaches them to his feet so he can travel without being detected and kill us. They are at Barunga, Matarangka and Worlowk [a large billabong near Matarangka].\
\\dt 19/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx kurdkurdngadjedje\
\\ps n.\
\\ge western.brown\
\\re western brown snake (E)\
\\re fi:Pseudonaja_nuchalis\
\\de western brown snake\
\\xv Kurdkurdngadjedje na-bang namekke ka-kodjngurlme dja werrkkimuk.\
\\xe The western brown snake has a dark head and has big scales.\
\\nt information provided by Belinj Patsy ngal-Barabba\
\\sc Pseudonaja nuchalis\
\\uv E\
\\ur ngurrurdu karrebalbal\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 07/Apr/2011\
\
\\lx man-kurdudjumuk\
\\ps n.\
\\re yellow dye tree\
\\re fi:Coelospermum_reticulatus\
\\de Scraggly shrub or small tree to 4 m high. Roots used for yellow colour dye for fibre craft. The skin of the roots is shaved off and boiled to produce the yellow dye. If the ash of certain eucalypt wood (e.g. fi:Corymbia_polysciada) is added the yellow dye changes in colour to a reddish brown. The plant also produces a black edible fruit available in the wet season. The fruits are smooth globular berries, about 7-10 mm diameter, green turning blackish when ripe; 3-4 seeds embedded in pulp. The dry stems are sometimes also used as firestick drills.\
\\sc Coelospermum reticulatum\
\\ee Roots crushed and boiled to dye pandanus fibre used in the manufacture of baskets and dilly bags.\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\sy I= man-djurndum\
\\uv Kdj= an-djurndum\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 06/Feb/2013\
\
\\lx kuk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de body, shape, form\
\\ng most frequently attested as an incorporated noun\
\\xv Bu mak man-buyika manu mak, nawu wurdyaw bininj ka-djordmen kam-yawurrinjmen, yikahyika kabirri-re kure fs:doctor yikahyikah mak kabirri-re kure kun-kuk bininj. \
\\xe Another thing is, when a young boy grows up and becomes a teenager sometimes they are circumcised by a doctor but sometimes they are circumcised in the traditional way by an Aboriginal man.\
\\xv Yi-djare bun kukkurrme.\
\\xe Did you want me to hit you and knock you down to the ground.\
\\xv Nganabbarru ngarri-dulubom ka-kukyo kumekke.\
\\xe We shot a buffalo and its body is lying there.\
\\se Kukbele.\
\\de white-skinned person\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx kuk\
\\ps incorp. nom.\
\\sn 1\
\\re money, incorporated form\
\\de Incorporated form meaning \'91money, funding, cash\'92.\
\\xv Kan-kukwo!\
\\xe Give me some money!\
\\se kukmarnbun\
\\re make a profit\
\\de Make a profit, make money.\
\\se kukbidbuyhwe\
\\de Raise the price of something.\
\\se kukkoluyhwe\
\\re lower price of saleable item\
\\re give discount on cost of something\
\\de Lower the price of something.\
\\sn 2\
\\re fruit\
\\de Fruit (as incorporated noun).\
\\se kukwarrawarrhke\
\\de Knock down fruit from a tree.\
\\xv Ngalyawk ba-bidbom ba-kukwarrawarrhkeng an-djarduk.\
\\xe The young woman climbed up and knocked down the bush apple fruit.\
\\dt 19/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx Kukabarnka\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de an old seasonal camp site in fv:Kunanganja clan estate once used as a base during the magpie goose\
hunting season.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kukabarnka\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Old seasonal camp in Kun-kurulk lands, visited for magpie geese. Not far from Liverpool River via\
Mumeka landing road.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kukabel\
\\ps n.\
\\de morning\
\
\\lx Kukadjdjerre\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kurulk clan estate.\
\\xv Kukadjdjerre darnki Kurrurldul, bolk-Kurulk.\
\\xe Kukadjdjerre is near Kurrurldul in Kurulk clan estate.\
\\ee Kulmarru clan speakers say this place is in Kulmarru clan estate or fv:Melmarra (Yikurrumu) area, east\
of Yikarrakkal.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kukadje\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge abundant\
\\re abundant\
\\re too many\
\\de lots of, abundant, too many\
\\xv Bulkay djenj kukadje.\
\\xe At Bulkay there are lots of fish.\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kukak\
\\cf see fv:-kak\
\\de night time\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kukalak\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Name of an estate in the Goomadderr River region.\
\\sd estate\
\
\\lx kukamak\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial campsite\
\\xv Karri-bidbun karri-wadme kure kukamak.\
\\xe Let's enter the ceremony area and complete the ceremony at the ceremonial campsite.\
\
\\lx Kukanidji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de near Liverpool River (on Marrkolidjban side). Sometimes visited in late wet season for berries of\
Antidesma ghaesembila. Open plain country, black soil.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kukarddak\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx kuk-balabbala\
\\ps adj.\
\\de smooth, polished\
\
\\lx kukbam\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Triglochin.tuber\
\\re fi:Triglochin_dubia\
\\re tuber, edible\
\\de kind of edible small yam/tuber\
\\xv An-kukbam ku-kabo ka-rri.\
\\xe fi:Triglochin_dubia is found near creeks.\
\\sc Triglochin dubia\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sy birrkarn\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kukboddi\
\\va wukboddi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be in foetal position (either on feet or lying on side)\
\
\\lx kuk-bonjdjekbidbidbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de goose bumps\
\\xv Ngarri-kuk-bonjdjekbidbidbom.\
\\xe We had goose bumps all over our bodies.\
\
\\lx kuk-bul\'e9rri\
\\ps n.\
\\de black skinned person, aboriginal person\
\\sy kuk-kurduk\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx kuk-burriwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de construct with skill, used as a compliment to praise the skill usually of a craftsperson or artist.\
\\xv Yi-kuk-burriweng.\
\\xe You've really made it well.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kuk-dadjke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de butcher\
\\sn 2\
\\de divide an amount eg. food or money.\
\
\\lx kukdahdadjmiken\
\\ps adj.\
\\de striped with blocks of different colour\
\\xv Barndol kukdahdadjmiken.\
\\xe The Carpet Python has striped blocks of colour.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kukdoweken\
\\ps n.\
\\de serious person, one who rarely laughs\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx kukdurndiwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge make.appear\
\\re make appear\
\\de cause game to appear or be plentiful, cause game to come back to a place\
\\xv Ngarri-welengkukdurndiweyi morrdjdjanjno bi-bebkeyi. Korroko bu dabborrabbolk dja anbu kayakki bolkkime bininj\
ka-wakawakwan nawu morrdjdjanjno na-kerrnge yawurrinj kah-ngalme. \
\\xe We would make them [the kangaroos] come back in numbers again by the singing of fv:morrdjdjanjno songs. In the past the old\
people knew how to do that, but today people don't know this, that is the young men of the new generation.\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx kukdjokkorranj\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become tight\
\\xv Werrk karri-lawkmang la dolobbo ka-kuk-djokkorranj.\
\\xe We must hurry to peel the bark off the tree because the bark is becoming tight (due to the onset of the\
dry season.\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx kuken\
\\pr na-, (ng)al, man-, kun-\
\\ps adj.\
\\re important\
\\re culturally significant, culturally well-known\
\\re traditional\
\\de of recognised cultural significance, important as part of tradition, traditional\
\\xv Karri-re ku-kare ka-bolkkuken.\
\\xe Let's go to the same place again, to that place we always go to.\
\\ee Applies especially to places, foods and cultural practices.\
\\ng requires a noun class prefix e.g. na-kuken, man-kuken etc; or a locative prefix e.g. ku-kuken\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kukku\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de ?, produces a poisonous 'apple'\
\\sc\
\\ee seen on bank of Liverpool River\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kukkurduk\
\\ps n.\
\\de black skinned person, person covered in dirt\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Kukkulumurr\
\\va Kukkurlumurr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarnbulu clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kukkurr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Lightning dreaming site on Liverpool River. Prominent red cliffs on east side of the river bank. This is\
a 'dangerous' site.fv:Marrirn clan estate.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kukmarnburren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de organise oneself, arrange the position of one's body\
\\xv Mulbbamb ngurri-kukmarnburren.\
\\xe Arrange yourselves so you're all squashed together (said to children lying down on a matress to sleep).\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx kukmayol\
\\ps n.\
\\de stupid or ignorant person, often used as an insult to describe a person unsophisticated in\
non-Aboriginal ways\
\\bw probably from Kriol 'mayal'.\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx kukno\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de raw, uncooked\
\\sn 2\
\\de not ripe\
\\sn 3\
\\de The tuber of a plant.\
\\uv E\
\\xv Mandjordmo manwarre, mane kukno minj karri-ngun na-warre.\
\\xe The Grewia retusifolia plant is not good to eat, we don't eat the tuber, it's no good.\
\\pdn na-guybi\
\
\\lx kukudji\
\\ps n.\
\\de of the same generation, siblings\
\\xv Birri-kukudji, birri-danginj.\
\\xe They're all the same generation, they're siblings.\
\
\\lx kukurnu\
\\ps n.\
\\de shade\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-djurle.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kukwarlkworren\
\\ps v. refl.\
\\ge recoil\
\\re recoil in fright\
\\de recoil in fear or fright\
\\xv Burarr nga-kukweng, birri-kukwarlkworrinj, yimarnek nayin.\
\\xe I threw a water goanna down and they recoiled in fright thinking it was a snake.\
\\dt 03/May/2011\
\
\\lx kukweykan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de surrender somebody over, get somebody and give them over.\
\\xv Ben-marne-bebmeng djamun wanjh kukweykarrinj.\
\\xe He appeared before the police and then gave himself up.\
\
\\lx kukworrowkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de jump up, usually in fright\
\
\\lx kukwurrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de startle,frighten\
\
\\lx kukwurrhkerren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de frighten, startle.\
\
\\lx kukyirrek\
\\ps adj.\
\\de slippery-bodied, slimy\
\
\\lx kuk-yirrek\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de freshwater eels, single gilled eel\
\\sc Synbranchus bengalensis, Ophisternon gutturale\
\
\\lx kulabakku\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de pied heron\
\\sc Egretta picata\
\
\\lx kulabbarl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de billabong, swamp\
\\cf -labbarl\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kularama\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\sn 1\
\\de name of a Rembarrnga patriclan\
\\xv Kaldjdjinawangane kumekke birri-bokkabokkang kumekke ruruy ngadjadj ngarduk worro, na-Kularama.\
\\xe At Kaldjdjinawangane there they were hunting in a fire drive and my uncle was burnt the poor thing, he was a Kularama clansman.\
\\sn 2\
\\de A fi:yikurrumu clan name associated with the Darnkolo clan (lower Mann River) and connected to sites near Gamardi, a Djinang place in the Blyth River district of central north-Arnhem Land.\
\\xv Djaddi ngarridjdjan ngalengarre nga-bimbom and komrdaw bedda berrewoneneg djang. Kakodbebuldi, yibba, Kudjaddjirrk nakang, Kularama yikurrumu nguyano. Darnkorlo and Kularama and all the Birinmarr mob, yikurrumu. Djang Yabburdurrwa ken. Kadudjerren, namekke. Komrdawh djang rerre bedberre konda baleh bukka Djalwardawarda, komrdawh djang, kabolk-ngey-yo, Kularama-ken and burrkburrkyi, kun-nguya Gamardi nga-bimbom nga-yimeng bedberre.\
\\xe This is a frog painting from ngarridjdjan's [my wife's] country and also their long neck turtle dreaming.  Its the ornate burrowing frog from a site in the Kakodbebuldi district at a place called Kudjaddjirrk in the Kularama and Birinmarr clan estates, It is a sacred site associated with the fi:Yabburdurrwa fi:yirridjdja patrimoiety ceremony. That frog which buries itself and also that long neck turtle which also buries itself, from their sacred site (i.e. that of his wives). It's a sacred site for the long neck turtle called Djalwardawarda in Kularama fi:yikurrumu clan estate but also associated with a site in Burrkburrkyi clan in Djinang country [a long way to the east in the Blyth River district and pronounced Burkburk in Djinang]. I've drawn their emblem.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kularrhdjurle\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Sandy \'91beach\'92 on an open stretch or billabong of the Goomadeer River. Kularrhdjurle lies just near the confluence of the Goomadeer and Gumardir rivers, directly before the Goomadeer River heads into the rocky narrowing at Kindjed. Significant as a camping place. Ku-larrh-djurle, literally \'91LOCative-dry.out-shade\'92\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 18/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kularri Djang\uc0\u8232 \\va Wularri Djang\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Wind Dreaming site east of the Gumardir River. There is a gorge which runs north-south through the rocky plateau just east of the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River, and this site is on the very southern end of this gorge. The site consists of two large holes in the rock created by water flowing down from the gorge above. The lower rock hole is the focus of the djang (Dreaming). \
Wularri is the name of a wind which blows from the west. The \'91w\'92 in the word is the lenited (softened) form of the initial \'91k\'92 which has been maintained in the place name as place names tend to be archaic forms which may freeze phonological form. This site is an important and regionally well known djang for this wind which was taken advantage of by kangaroo hunters as the wind stopped kangaroos from hearing the approaching hunter. As of 2004, there was a banyan fig tree (fi:Ficus_virens) growing by the edge of the hole and this tree is struck with an axe whilst the djang increase ritual is performed, the hunter cries out for more fv:wularri wind to assist in kangaroo hunts.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kulerrelerredjurle\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de An section of creek and open forest in the Maburrinj estate, upstream (south) of Madjanngalkku. An important camping place where people made bark shelters in the bush. Place means literally \'91in the shade of the fi:Bossiaea_bossiaeoides shrubs\'92.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kulidjkalh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kulkbardbard\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\ge fish sp.\
\\re fish sp. (saltwater)\
\\de kind of saltwater fish, possibly a trevally\
\\xv Kulkbardbard kurrurla-waken.\
\\xe Kulkbardbard is a salt water fish.\
\\so LBN\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 14/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kulmarru\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan on the middle Mann River district fv:Yikurrumu equivalent is fv:Melmarra.\
\\xv Ngarri-yi-kadjurrinj. Kun-red manekke ngadberre, birri-Bordoh, and birri-Kulmarru and birri-Kurulk. Yo ngadberre\
kun-red.\
\\xe We always shared our land. Our land together with Bordoh clan and Kulmarru clan and Kurulk clan. Yes, all of our country [together].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\ee fi:yikurrumu equivalent names are fv:Melmarra and fv:Djarlum\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kulngunj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de black berry tree\
\\sc Vitex glabrata\
\\pde man-kurndalh\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kuluban\
\\ps n.\
\\ge flying.fox\
\\re black flying fox\
\\re fi:Pteropus alecto\
\\de Generic for all flying foxes but also specifically the black flying fox.\
\\xv Kuluban kure njilhmi ka-yo.\
\\xe Flying foxes live near freshwater springs.\
\\sc Pteropus alecto\
\\pdn kk =djingkorrk\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kuluban djurdno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de generic name for ferns\
\\sc Drynaria quercifolia, Dicranopteris linearis, Stenochlaena spp.\
\\sy ankobinj\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx Kulubukayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de seasonal camp in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate on a creek in the plain country.\
\\ee Kabbal kadduh-kaddum, wakkidj kabirri-we.\
\\xe A place way up on the plain country. They go fishing there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kulumudduk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lily\
\\re lily\
\\re fi:Crinum_angustifolium\
\\de Lily.\
\\sc Crinum angustifolium\
\\sd plants\
\
\\lx kulunduh\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.sp.\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_acacioides\
\\de a flood plain paperbark which has some similarities to fi:Melaleuca_nervosa, although the latter often has more brown to greyish bark. \
\\xv An-kulunduh ka-banj yiman ka-yime kuluban.\
\\xe The fi:Melaleuca_acacioides paperbark tree smells like flying fox.\
\\ee fi:Melaleuca_acacioides grows in more semi-saline situations (e.g. back of tidal flats) such as at Mimanjarr on the Tomkinson River\
flood plains. The tree gives off a strongish odour like the smell of flying fox.\
\\sd plant\
\\so Lofty Bardayal Nadjamerrek\
\\sc Melaleuca acacioides\
\\bb Plant identified by JRS\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx kulurnduk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de paperbark species\
\\xv Man-kulurnduk yiman kuluban ka-banj.\
\\xe fv:Man-kulurnduk smells like flying foxes.\
\
\\lx kulurrmomo\
\\ps n.\
\\ge potter.wasp\
\\re potter wasp\
\\de potter wasps\
\\sd insects\
\\sc \
\
\\lx kulurrudj\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sand.palm\
\\re fi:Livistona_humilis\
\\de sand palm\
\\xv An-karnbirr, manekke man-me ngalengarre an-kulurrudj o yika bakno ka-ngun bakno, kun-bak bu karri-nan ku-wukku manekke ka-welengbakngun.\
\\xe fi:Acacia_oncinocarpa, that is her [emu's] food, Livistonia palm seeds, or sometimes water weed, the weeds you see in the water, she can then go and eat that too.\
\\ee In Kuninjku this name is a synonym for the more commonly used name fv:djendek but in Kundedjnjenghmi and Kundjeyhmi fv:an-kulurrudj refers to the shorter varieties or juvenile specimens whilst the larger specimens are called an-marrabbi.\
\\sc Livistona humilis\
\\sy djendek, marrabbi, djankele\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\ur I= marrabbi, Djnj, E= djankele\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kulurrudj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de short variety/growth stage of the sand palm known as <marrabbi>\
\\sc Livistona humilis\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kuluwuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\re fi:Ganophyllum_falcatum\
\\re scaly ash tree\
\\de Scaly ash tree. Large tree (10-25m) which grows in monsoon vine thickets.\
\\sc Ganophyllum falcatum\
\\sd plant\
\
\\lx kuluwurr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de large monsoon forest tree\
\\sc Calophyllum sil\
\\uv I\
\\ur Djnj= djarralda\
\
\\lx kuluybirr\
\\ps n.\
\\de KW name for fv:ngaldadmurrng\
\
\\lx kuluyhkuluy\
\\va kuluykuluy\
\\ps n.\
\\ge frogmouth\
\\re tawny frogmouth\
\\de Tawny frogmouth.\
\\sc Podargus strigoides\
\\xv Kuluyhkuluy kokbabi, kan-nahnan.\
\\xe The tawny frogmouth is a big-eyed staring thing, it watches us continually.\
\\syn kumuyuk-kumuyuk\
\\sd bird\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\ur W= djurrul, Kdj syn.= aleddjumud\
\
\\lx kulwirri\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Corypha.palm\
\\re fi:Corypha_elata\
\\re cabbage palm\
\\de giant cabbage palm\
\\sc Corypha elata\
\\ee The fruit of this tree is called fv:muludji, the skins of which are edible after removal of the toxins through processing. fv:Kulwirri is a\
15-20m fan leaved palm which grows in only a very few locations in Arnhem Land, one being the banks of the lower Liverpool River at\
Yinamudja. The palm produces spectacular inflorescences and fruit only when mature, and then the tree dies.\
\\sy muludji |fs\{(this word however refers more specifically to the fruit)\}\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kulawuddul\
\\ps n.\
\\de initiate in Kunabibi and Yabburdurrwa ceremony\
\\ee An initiate cannot be addressed by his normal name by women. He must be called 'kulawuddul'.\
Sisters often call their young teenaged brothers this term until the boy has participated in a larger\
number of ceremonies.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kumadj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de neck\
\\pdv kk\
\\ee Subsumes fv:kun-kom and fv:kun-djurd.\
\\xv Karri-kumadjdurrbidmerren kondah.\
\\xn Karri-komdukkarren.\
\\xe Let\'92s tie it around our necks.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kumadjarewarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de Way of speaking or register that involves teasing or joking and used only by those in certain kin relationships such as between a person and their MMB or classificatory MMBC which involves a form of ritual or conventional teasing, swearing and the exchange of jocular obscenities.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I = Kunmodjarewarre\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kumadjdurrbidme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de tie around neck\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kom-dukkan\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kumardderr\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge Goomadeer\
\\re Goomadeer (placename)\
\\de Placename, former outstation and corrupted in English to give 'Goomadeer River'. Literally 'at the silver-leaved paperbark'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx Kumarduba\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Section of a small creek in the Maburrinj estate, upstream of Kambukkakarung. The open bush here is easy to traverse.\uc0\u8232 \\xv Kaboyirriyo Kumarduba, Kambukkakarung.\
\\xe  Along this creek are the sites Kumarduba and Kambukkakarung.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kumalabukka\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Name of an estate on the East Alligator River.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kumalbimuk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\uc0\u8232 \\de Regional name for a cluster of hills not far from the jungle springs Rurrkkarrkken and Kanangarridjmeng. The hills are about 10km west of the Goomadeer [Kumadderr] river, to the west of Lindji.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kamundini\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Site to the west (or south-southwest) of Djelkmerre. It was a camping place for fv:dabborrabbolk \'91old people/ancestors\'92 and there are caves in the escarpment here. Said to be in the Kunnanj region.\uc0\u8232 \\xv Mani wanjh manekke Kamundini manu yi-balkolung yi-nan ka-wardderri. \
\\xe This is where you go down to Kamundini (near Kunnanj), and where you can see the rocky escarpment country.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kumando\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Area on Darwin road, black soil plain country east of Mimanjarr. This is kun-kardbam and\
kun-burnungku (Rembarrnga) territory which seems to be shared by both groups.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kumandjarrhyi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kumarabuledjurle\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Small jungle thicket on a creek in the Djalbangurrk estate in the upper Gumardir River area (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer). Gurgling brook and rocky banks.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kumarrirnbang\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Outstation community about twelve kilometres south-west of Marrkolidjban. Also an estate name or fv:kun-ngeykimuk for the surrounding country.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kumbe\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place about 10 kilometres north of Yaymini in Waybburda estate. There is a small waterfall at Kumbe where it is said a lightning fv:bolung 'rainbow serpent' resides. The Barabba clansman Mandarrk claimed to have 'lightning bones' which he collected from this site.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kumbehmerren\
\\ps reflex.v.\
\\de cover self over\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde barrhburren\
\\xv Man-djil kan-bonghme karri-dokan karri-bonghme kun-burlburl karri-kumbehmerren.\
\\xn Man-djewk kan-bun karri-re karri-kodbun karri-barrhburren.\
\\xe The rain is falling on us let\'92s make a paperbark shelter.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kumbid\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge tree.sp.\
\\de kind of tree\
\\xv Ankumbid marrek konda karri, Marranboy ka-rri. Barlkkan kabarri-marnbun.\
\\xe fv:An-kumbid is not found here (i.e. on the northern Arnhem Land plateau), but at Maranboy (area). They use it to make boomerangs.\
\\sc unidentified, |fs\{possibly an acacia.\}\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kume\
\\ps loc. dem.\
\\re there, at that place (shortened version of kumekke)\
\\de Shortened version of fv:kumekke \'91there, at that place\'92.\
\\xv Ngarriyoy Merl. Merl kunkodjdje kume arringuneng. Ngarriwaddarri kumekke Merl.\
\\xe We camped at Merl. There at Merl overnight we would eat. We made camp there at Merl.\
\\dt 25/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx kumekke\
\\va kume\
\\ps loc. dem.\
\\re there, at that place\
\\de There, at that place previously referred to or jointly known.\
\\xv Nimbuwah bikang nuye ngalbadjan beneyerrkang beneredmarnburrinj benehni kore Kunbarlanja kumekke Nimbuwa bimey nuye daluk ngalyawk ngeyyoy Warramundud. Dja kumekke ni na-kudji bininj ngeyyoy Djiribidj nawu mayh buni.\
\\xe Nimbuwah went along with his mother and they stopped to camp near Gunbalanya and here Nimbuwa took his wife, a young woman called Warramundud. There was also another man there Djiribidj who was out hunting.\
\\xv Naddab ngarri. Kumekke ngarridjangkani ngaye nganedangerrinj.\
\\xe I was at Naddab. We used to go hunting there, me and my brothers.\
\\dt 25/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Kuminjik\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kumirrkowalak\
\\va Kumerrkkowalak\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Appears to be the name for an area encompassing a number of sites to the north and south of the Gunbalanya-Nabarlek road, directly east of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek. These include fv:Bele_Kadjang \'91paralysis dreaming\'92 to the north of the Nabarlek road and a rock shelter in the escarpment to the south of the road. \
\\xv Kumirrkkowalak wanjh njamed ka-djangdi, bele.\
\\xe At Kumirrkkowalak, there is a whatsit, paralysis dreaming (sacred site).\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx kumoken\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Fresh Water Crocodile\
\\sc Crocodylus johnstoni\
\\pdn kk = ngaldjakdjalarrk\
\\uv E, Djnj, Kdj =modjarrkki\
\\uv Kune synonym (Cadell River dialect) = nawulhmu\
\\ee REM = koyo\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kumokkorri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kumorlo\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de This place name appears to apply to much of a tributary of the so-called \'91Gumardir\'92 River. This tributary meets the Gumardir from the southwest soon after both flow off the Djalbangurrk estate escarpment around 9km upstream of the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 and \'91Goomadeer\'92 rivers. Upstream of the confluence the creek continues for about 10km.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kumorrbolk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kumurla\
\\ps n.\
\\de someone who has exceptional skill in any area, an expert hunter for example, someone who can find\
food easily and has supernatural power to locate food such as animals, honey or vegetable foods. To\
obtain this power someone may be taken to a secret location and given an object or special food which\
would convey power to them.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kumurrng\
\\ps adj.\
\\de very early morning \\ kumurrng buldjarn / late into the night, nearly daybreak\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kumuyuk-kumuyuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge frogmouth\
\\re tawny frogmouth\
\\de Tawny frogmouth. This bird is associated with fv:namarnde or fv:wayarra spirit beings and reference to its call is used to scare children.\
\\sc Podargus strigoides\
\\xv Kumuyuk-kumuyuk kawokdi, kamre, namarnde name.\
\\xe The tawny frogmouth is calling out, it is a devil coming! [said to children]\
\\syn kumuyuk-kumuyuk\
\\sd bird\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\ur W= djurrul, Kdj syn.= aleddjumud\
\
\\lx kun\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de right hand side\
\\xv Kun-kun yi-bidwayhmen!\
\\xe Lift up your right hand!\
\
\\lx kunkun\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de blanket\
\\pde blengked\
\\xv Kunkun kandiweybun ngabunbehmerren.\
\\xn Kandiwo blengked ngabarrhburren.\
\\xe Give me a blanket to cover myself with.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kunabibi\
\\ps n.\
\\re ceremony name\
\\de Major regional fv:duwa patrimoiety cult ceremony the details of which are not in the public domain.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 12/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx kunak\
\\ps n.\
\\re fire\
\\de Fire, firewood, fire at hearth. Symbol or totem of the matry fv:yarriburrik.\
\\xv \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kabene-kurrme kore kunak kabene-mudkinje ba ka-kurlahrayekmen. \
\\xe The two of them singe the feathers [of the emu] in the fire so that the skin becomes hard. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\ur I, E= kunrak\
\\dt 12/Sep/2016\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\lx kunakko\
\\ps n.\
\\re in-law term\
\\de Reciprocal address term used between people of the same sex who call each other fv:kakkali, i.e. affines such as brothers or sisters-in-law. Requires a pronominal prefix e.g. fv:ngarrkunakko \'91you and I are in-laws\'92, fv:ngune-kunakko \'91you two are in-laws\'92, fv:kabenekunakko \'91they two are in-laws\'92.\
\\xv Ngaye nganekunakko Yirrawala.\
\\xe My brother-in-law Yirrawala.\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 252 \
\\id DK\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx Kunanganja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan on the lower Liverpool River\
\\xv Kungorobu ka-bolkkunanganja.\
\\xe Kungorobu is a Kunanganja clan place.\
\\ee This clan is now extinct.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kunbad\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate.\
\\xv Kunbad darnki Mankorlod la kaddum.\
\\xe Kunbad is upstream not far from Mankorlod.\
\
\\lx Kunbad Karri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate, a seasonal camp on the Tomkinson River floodplain visited in early\
dry season for trapping barramundi with conical fish traps. Also a fv:Na-korrkko ancestor site.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kunbad karrulubun\
\\ps n.\
\\ge darter\
\\re Australian darter\
\\re fi:Anhinga_melanogaster_novaehollandiae\
\\de Australian darter\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= djingarrarr, mandjangarli, W= kardabaybay, kunwardde karrulubun, Kdj= kardabaybay.\
\\sc Anhinga melanogaster novaehollandiae\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kunbakminyawol\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site on a spring-fed creek in the Maburrinj estate, just downstream (west) of Ngabakyerrbinj in an open forested plain. A little over 5km east of the Goomadeer River, where it makes a sharp right-angle turn to the north following the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kunbalkunu\
\\ps dem\
\\de in that manner, in that way, like that\
\\uv W\
\
\\lx Kunbekmornmorn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place with rock shelter near Marrkolidjban/Kumarrirnbang. Rock shelters here contain much rock art.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kunberrkken\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Kunberrkken is a region of boulders with overhangs in the Djalbangurrk estate on the plain 2km to the south of the Makkalarl billabong. There are numerous documented rock art shelters here. The works include dynamic and post-dynamic figures, beeswax designs, macropods and a lightning figure. The site name means literally \'91Of the plain country/savanna bush\'92.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kunbodjamorrkken\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de An area of rolling hilly savanna country on the margin of rocky outliers in the Makorl estate. The savanna area lies to the west of the Goomadeer River, near its confluence with the Gumardir River. Kunbodjamorrkken lies on the southern end of the savanna, with Kadjamankayhmi at the northern escarpment. Kunbodjamorrkken is regarded as an important yam site, includes a kangaroo fire drive area and has gorges and areas of jungle thicket at the escarpment.  \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 18/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kunburray\
\\ps n. prop\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de estate name on the upper Liverpool River\
\\xv Ngalbadbulu Kunburray kure njilhmi ka-rri, ka-welewelme barrk.\
\\xe At Ngalbadbulu in the Kunburray area, there is a spring and there are lots of black wallaroos.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 03/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx kunburriyaymi\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de male water spirits similar to the female version fv:ngal-kunburriyaymi. These are said to reside at\
Benebenemdi in Barabba clan estate and are white in appearance. Only in Kune dialect is the 'na-' prefix\
used for the name of this spirit. The Kuninjku call them fv:ngal-kunburriyaymi na-rangem or 'male\
mermaid'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kundalk nin nuye\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of grass eaten by the double-barred finch fv:Taeniopygia bichenovii.\
\\sc Eriachne obtusa\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx kundalk ngeyyak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de a kind of herbaceous plant which does not have a name in Bininj Kunwok, but some kangaroos eat it.\
\\sc Fimbristylis composita\
\\sn 2\
\\de kind of small herb (.5m) with white 'lamb's tail' inflorescence\
\\sc Ptilotus sp.\
\
\\lx kundam\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 1\
\\de finger 2. hand\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-bid.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kundamen\
\\ps n.\
\\re frill-necked lizard\
\\re fi:Chlamydosaurus_kingii\
\\de Frill-necked lizard.\
\\sc Chlamydosaurus kingii\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur I= danngarr, W= nalangak\
\\dt 15/May/2014\
\
\\lx kundamkorrongko\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de mud crab\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde barnkabarra\
\\sc Scylla serrata\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kundanbarr\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Billabong on the western side of the East Alligator River with two hills nearby. Kundanbarr is about 38km southeast (upstream) from Cahill's Crossing near a creek which meets the East Alligator from the west.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx kundangburddjikaberrk\
\\ps n.\
\\de Dialect name used by the Kune to describe the speakers of Western Kunwok (such as at Kunbarlanja and Jabiru)\
\\uv E\
\\sy berreboyen\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kundangyohmi\
\\ps n.\
\\de dialect name, Kune name used to describe Western Mayali dialects said to be fv:na-kerlk or 'soft'.\
\\uv E.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kundanjmulu\
\\edit Check spelling\uc0\u8232 \\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place name in Birrirddak Creek region.\uc0\u8232 \\xv Larrk, nakka weleng Madjanik karrkad nakka kuberrk. Manekke Madjanik kam-kolung Nabarlek beh... Kudjumarndi. Mani wanjh ngalengman manu Kundanjmulu an-kabo Kunmayimbuk man-kabo.\u8232 \\xe No, this way then you come out at Madjanik, out of the gorge. You come down there from Nabarlek... Kudjumarndi. Then there is Kundanjmulu and the creek that goes to Kunmayimbuk.\u8232 \\sd placename\u8232 \\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kundarrayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate. of great significance. It is a 'dangerous' sacred site on the escarpment\
with much rock art and mortuary sites.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kundayarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de pandanus\
\\sc Pandanus spiralis\
\\ee GG=yirrinji\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kundedjnjenghmi\
\\ps n.\
\\de Bininj Kunwok dialect associated with fv:na-djordi, na-djorrolam, na-madjdjalum, na-mok and\
fv:na-wurrbbarn clans (and numerous others as well). Spoken today at Marlkawo, Manmoyi and\
Kamarrkawan.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kundedjwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\de na-Kurulk clan lect name\
\\cf man-dedjwarre\
\\ce small amount (food)\
\\cf nanjid\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kundoyhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge callOBJfFather-in-law\
\\re call OBJ father-in-law\
\\de Call OBJ father-in-law or son-in-law.\
\\xv Arr-kundoyhme na-bangardi, na-godjok.\
\\xe We call Nabangardi and Nagodjok 'fv:kun-doy'.\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 30/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx kundulk ngeyyak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of tree which does not have a name in Bininj Kunwok, thus the reference 'no name'\
\\sc Xyris spp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kundulk ngeyyak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de kind of tree which does not have a name in Bininj Kunwok, thus the reference 'no name'\
\\sc Xyris spp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sn 2\
\\de a kind of grass which does not have a name in Bininj Kunwok, thus the reference 'no name', eaten by\
buffaloes, agile wallabies and euros\
\\sc Schizachyrium sp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 23/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx Kundulke\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de billabong in fv:Kurulk clan estate, west of fv:Mumeka\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kundjabe\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate on the Mann River at the eastern end of fv:Kabarrebarre.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kundjalerri Kayo\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site on the upper East Alligator River, on a traditional walking route from the east via which fv:man-kole ('bamboo spears') were traded. Tributaries meet the East Alligator here from the east and west, about 47km southeast of Cahill's Crossing. A good fishing area for black bream, barramundi and saratoga.   \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx kundjangmelme\
\\ps v. check\
\\de poised ready to spear\
\\xv Birri-nang kah-kodjkeyo nungka karndakkidj. "Kondanj ngurri-din". Wabwabmeng\
kondanj, kondanj, kondanj kundjangmelmeng drrrr rakmo murrngbakmeng.\
\\xe They saw the kangaroo sleeping. "Stay here", (he said). He snuck up bit by bit, stood poised ready to\
spear and whoosh, he speared it in the backbone and broke its back.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kundjiburren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de argue/fight and then walk away in anger, walk away from an argument\
\
\\lx Kundjidjnguk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Eastern side of a small valley just west of the Djurlka waterfall. Kundjidjnguk (east) is the other side of the gorge entrance to Ngakoleng (west). This is a walking track to Kudjekbinj and it is also a red ochre site. The site is associated with the fish spirit Djidjnguk, which is a widely known spirit being throughout western Arnhem Land. The site can be seen from the road between Mamadawerre to Djurlka.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kundjikka Djang\
\\lit 'Breast sacred site'\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Female water spirit dreaming site in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx Kundjikurdubuk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Name of an estate on the East Alligator River.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kune\
\\va Kuney\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge IV.this.one\
\\re language name\
\\de name of the easternmost variety of Bininj Kunwok spoken south and south-east of Maningrida at the communities of Buluh Kaduru,Bolkdjam, Ankabadbirri and Korlobidahdah\
\\ee The name is based on the demonstrative fv:kune 'that one'. Kune is said to be in two sub-varieties, Kune Nakerlk and Kune Narayek,the latter being that spoken at Korlobidahdah by people whose ancestral language was also Dangbon and the former by people at the other Kune speaking communities who also identify with the Rembarrnga language. \
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\bb Maddock (1969: 45) discusses the participation of the 'Gunei' (Kune) in Yabburdurrwa rites at Beswick in the 1960s. Kyle-Little (1957:214), Altman (1987:15) and Taylor (1987: 70), all mention an eastern Kunwinjku dialect by the name of Gurra, Guru, or Kuru respectively. These names are various spellings of the word fv:kurruh, which is a label other Bininj Kunwok speakers use for the Kune who use the social identity or fv:kundangwok interjection fv:kurruh and whom the Kuninjku describe as fv:kabirri-kurruhme  'they use the word 'kurruh'. Maddock, K. (1969). The Jabuduruwa - a study of the structure of rite and myth in an Australian Aboriginal religious cult on the Beswick Reserve, Northern Territory.  Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Sydney, Sydney.\
Kyle-Little, S. (1957). Whispering Wind: adventures in Arnhem Land. London: Hutchinson. Altman, J. C. (1987). Hunter-gatherers\
today: an Aboriginal economy in north Australia. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies. Taylor, L. (1987). 'The same but different': social reproduction and innovation in the art of the Kunwinjku of western Arnhem Land.  Unpublished doctoral dissertation,\
Australian National University, Canberra. \
\\dt 06/May/2007\
\
\\lx kune\
\\va kuneh, kuni\
\\ps dem.\
\\ge that.one\
\\re that one\
\\de class four demonstrative 'that one', 'like that', 'just over there'\
\\ng class IV demonstrative, fv:kun- class. fv:kune may be a contracted form of fv:kunekke\
\\xv Ngal-mak kune yekke ka-yo ngal-kanjrayek.\
\\xe It's good [buffalo meat], this dry season the meat has been tough.\
\\xv Kune kayime kamak ngarre, Kune kayime kamak ngarre, Yimarnek ngarrnayinj lirrkkurrmeninj\
ngarr-djurdkurrmeninj munguyhmunguyh.\
\\xe When like this, it is good for you and I to walk When like this, it is good for you and I to walk If we should see that the first crescent\
of the new moon has appeared We should lower out heads and keep them down always [words to a kevin Djimarr Wurrurrumi\
fv:kun-borrk song]\
\\xe The fv:kuni variant tends to have a locative sense 'just over there [middle distance].' Also appears in the common phrase\
fv:kune_ka-yime 'in that way', 'like that', 'that's how it is done'.\
\\dt 08/May/2007\
\
\\lx Kunebam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de an area along fv:Marrkolidjban creek in fv:Marrin clan estate.\
\
\\lx kuneke\
\\ps sub.pron.\
\\de that one, in that manner, at that time\
\\sy kunuka\
\
\\lx kunemeleng\
\\va kun-dungmeleng (CHECK)\
\\ps n.\
\\de first rains season, very early wet season\
\
\\lx kunewabme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sneak up when stalking an animal, move from place to place when stalking.\
\
\\lx kuni\
\\va kunih\
\\ps sub.pron.\
\\de that one, (middle distance)\
\
\\lx Kunibidji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge Ndjebbana.language\
\\re language name\
\\de name of a language, also called fv:Ndj\'e9bbana, spoken at Maningrida. Kun'bidji is the name of the people and their language is referred\
to as fv:Ndj\'e9bbana but in Bininj Kunwok, the two senses are collapsed into the language/people name fv:Kunibidji.\
\\xv Nawu kun-red ngarrih-ni all the Aboriginal marrek ngari-bengkayi bakki, or njalehnjale marrek ngarri-bengkayi\
kandidjdjawa and djukka, marrek ngarri-bengkayi. Ngarri-wakwam. Kaluk kam-wam wanjh ngan-bukkang ngadberre\
Mr Sweeney. Yoh, ngarrih-nang en birri-yimeng Kunibidji birrimh-kang. Birrim-wam wanjh ngandi-marneyimeng\
ngadberre and kandidjdjawa and djukka mane. En ngarri-kuknang wanjh ngarri-bengkang "Bakki mane\
ngurri-wungme!" \
\\xe All we Aboriginal people in the camp we didn't understand what tobacco was and we didn't understand sugar or flour.  We didn't\
know. Then Mr. Sweeney came and showed it to us. Yes, we saw it and the Kunibidji people had also brought it up with  Mr. Sweeney.\
They brought it up and they told us about this flour and sugar. When we saw it we then we understood. (The Kunibidjis told them)\
"This is tobacco, you smoke it!"\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx Kuninjku\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge Kuninjku\
\\re language name, variety of Bininj Kunwok\
\\de one of the language variety names of Bininj Kunwok, spoken by people in the lower Mann and Liverpool Rivers districts\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\sy Kun-rayek\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx kun-kare rerre\
\\ps adj. phrase\
\\ge same\
\\re same again\
\\de Same again.\
\
\\lx Kunkalh Kurlkmeng\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\xv Kunkalh Kurlkmeng kayawal kabirri-kebmudyawan.\
\\xe Kunkalh Kurlkmeng is where they look for the fine roots of yam vines [which lead to the yam tubers].\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kunkanindjuhmeng\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate. Formerly a fv:Mardayin ceremony place\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kunkeldjarrke\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de This is the western end of the Ngalurdbirrhmi gorge in the Kumarrirnbang estate, and the border area between the Kumarrirnbang and Maburrinj estates. The next site a kilometre to the west (south-west) is Kurrawa, which is part of the Maburrinj estate. There are numerous significant rock art sites of at Kunkeldjarrke.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kunkihken\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area upstream of Ngolowerre at the head of a small creek south of Kudjekbinj outstation. A traditional campsite where people would make bark shelters in the wet season. Place name means literally \'91mud-of/pertaining to\'92.\
\\xv Kunkihken dolobbo arridakmi arrikudjewkbuni.\uc0\u8232 \\xe At Kunkihken we used to make stringybark shelters in the wet season.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kunlorrekalurlhdi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Marrkolidjban creek dinner camp at the lorrkkon place. The lorrkkon rests in a bunch of paper bark\
trees and contains the bones of an old Balang.\
\\lit "Large expanse of dirt"\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kunmayimbuk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place north of\'a0the Birrirddak Creek region near the Gunbalanya to\'a0Maningrida road. Column of rock 130m on a rocky\'a0scarp\'a0standing\'a0out as a landmark from a distance. Can be seen from the north on the Maningrida road. The ancestral hero\'a0Kunmayimbuk came here and turned into this rocky column after a fight with Wurrakak (Tor Rock), although some other\'a0records say the fight was with Yirriyu. Kunmayimbuk\'a0came from the west travelling along Cooper Creek. Another man Yirriyu came from the north and met Kunmayimbuk. They had a long fight about fire as Yirriyu had none and Kunmayimbuk some. They separated and Yirriyu went north to his place and Kunmayimbuk went to Birrirddak Creek where he is now. During the wet season the water is always clear near Kunmayimbuk because he had fire but near Yirriyu it is dark because he had no fire.\uc0\u8232 \\xv Kaddum makka kore ka-yawbarrarn ka-bokahkabongimen makka Yirrirddid. Kanjdji ka- djale Kunmayimbuk.\u8232 \\xe Upstream (from Kunmayimbuk) there is a narrow gorge where the creek flows in there at Yirrirddid. Downstream then is Kunmayimbuk.\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 12/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kunmayinkay\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kunmimdurlurl\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in the Tin Camp Creek region\
\\de Creek and surrounding savannah in the headwaters of the sacred creek which runs into the end of Tin Camp Creek valley from the northeast. The land is flat with savannah and a paperbark fringed creek meandering through.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kunmodjarewarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de Way of speaking or register that involves teasing or joking and used only by those in certain kin relationships such as between a person and their MMB or classificatory MMBC which involves a form of ritual or conventional teasing, swearing and the exchange of jocular obscenities.\
\\uv I\
\\uv Djnj = Kumadjarewarre\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kunnonj\
\\va kunronj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Water.\
\\uv E\
\\ur W= kukku\
\\pdn kk = kun-djulkin\
\
\\lx Kunngulukki\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A billabong with water lillies called manbarrangkali in Kunwinjku and also a rock shelter and rock art site near the Mandilbareng to Kabbari road. \uc0\u8232 It is north of Kunyikuymi and part of the Kabbari site complex. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kunrakkani\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Area where the windmill is on Marrkolidjban creek in fv:Marrin clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Kunrorre Kalurlhdi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place on creek near Marrkolidjban, seasonal fishing camp and site for Lorrkkon ceremony.\
\
\\lx kunu\
\\ps dem.\
\\ge in.that.way\
\\re in that way\
\\de in that way, like that\
\\xv Yo kayudyudme. Bu ngun-kodjnan, wanjh ka-yudyudme. Bu yi-molknan wanjh kunu yi-bun. \
\\xe Yes, she [emu] walks around. If she sees you coming she takes off. If you can spy on her without her seeing you, then in that way you'll be able to kill her.\
\
\\lx kunubewu\
\\ps rel. pron.\
\\ge maybe\
\\re perhaps that\
\\re maybe\
\\de That which, that which might be\'85\
\\xv Yerre birriwern bininj birrimwam birridjawam-'Baleh nawu wurdyaw Wurrakak?' Bengdubberranj 'Kaluk ngayawan namekke wurdyaw.' Dja burrbuni namekke wurdyaw yakminj. Namekke wurdyaw wanjh kunwardde. Kunubewu kahmurrngyo kumekke. Nungka nabangni, namekke Wurrakak.\
\\xe After, a lot of people came and asked, 'Where\'92s that baby, Wurrakak?' 'He\'92s gone scrub I'll look around after for that baby.' But he knew that baby was finished. That baby is now a rock. There might be bones somewhere nearby. He was a cheeky fellow, that Wurrakak.\
\\xv Bukka wanjh kunubewu ngamed Badmarddi bedberre.\
\\xe Maybe that [place] belongs to Badmardi clan people.\
\
\\lx Kunukdi\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Estate name or fv:kun-ngeykimuk.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kunukkubimdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Two billabongs in the Djalbangurrk estate in the headwaters of the Gumardir River, 2-3 kms east of Makkalarl\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kunumbidj\
\\va Kurnumbidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan associated with Kune and Rembarrnga speaking people of the Cadell River region.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\\lx Kunumeleng\
\\va Kurnumeleng\
\\ps n.\
\\re season name, first rains\
\\re first rains season\
\\de Season name for the very first rain of the wet season, before the wet season properly sets in.\
\\sd seasons\
\\dt 29/Apr/2015\
\
\\lx Kunumidjarda\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Djok clan estate also called fv:Djokwandarken clan. This place was held in a 'company'\
relationship with fv:Yamarrk clan (MK) and was owned by the two now deceased land owners\
Nadjaybbin and his son Kurrumulurlu of fv:Djokwandarken clan. Some rock paintings in shelters at\
this place are attributed to these two men.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kunumulkam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place on a small creek near the painted rock shelters at fv:Kunbekmornmorn.\
\\sd place name\
\
\\lx Kununumi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site on the upper East Alligator River about a kilometre upstream from Djurrubu. Kununumi is in the vicinity of 55km southeast (upstream) of Cahill's Crossing. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Kununundjurle\
\\va Kuninindjurle\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx kunwardde karrulubun\
\\ps n.\
\\ge darter\
\\re Australian darter\
\\re fi:Anhinga_melanogaster_novaehollandiae\
\\de Australian darter\
\\sy kardabaybay\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= djingarrarr, mandjangarli, E= kunbad karrulubun\
\\sc Anhinga melanogaster novaehollandiae\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kunweybek\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Name of an estate or fv:kun-ngeykimuk.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kunwinjku\
\\ps n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language name\
\\de language name for dialect of Bininj Kunwok with the largest number of speakers\
\\xv Bedda karrikad Kunwinjku nawu kun-kerlk kabirri-wokdi, la ngad kun-rayek ngarri-wokdi.\
\\xe Those people to the west speak fv:Kunwinjku which is the 'soft' dialect but we [Kuninjku] speak the 'hard' dialect.\
\\ee Each dialect group in Bininj Kunwok often has its own name for each of the other language varieties in the Bininj Kunwok dialect chain. Kunwinjku speakers refer to their variety by this label fv:Kunwinjku. Some Kuninjku speakers may refer to it as fv:Kunrinjku or\
fv:Kunkerlk. Kune speakers call it fv:Kundangburddjikaberrk. Kundedjnjenghmi speakers refer to Kunwinjku as fv:Kundangyohmi.\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx Kunyikuymi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Kunyikuymi is djang (a Dreaming site) for the orphan story and is a highly sacred place. The area is located on the Goomadeer [Kumadderr] River around 16km southwest of Mamardawerre outstation. It has a large stretch of white sand which is a popular camping and fishing spot for Mamardawerre people who visit regularly. Two djang at Kunyikuymi represent the orphan and his brother respectively. Nadjardenj, the older brother, is represented by a rock attached to the cliff at the top above the valley and the orphan, while Nanjiwk (name of the site also) is a small rock on the ground some 100 metres from the sandy \'91beach\'92, both on the eastern side of the Goomadeer river. The rainbow serpent associated with killing the orphan and brother is represented by a rock in the shape of its head at the top of the river valley. This site is known as Kabbari Ngalyod.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kung\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de wild honey, sugar bag (generic)\
\\pdn kk = man-wuybbinj\
\
\\lx kungabmerren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de comb one's hair\
\
\cf2 \\lx Kungarnba\
\\ps place n.\
\\de King River country, area around the King River\
\\xv Namarnde kahdi kumekke Kungarnba.\
\\xe There is a Namarnde spirit there at Kungarnba. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 212\
\\sd placename\
\\id DK\
\\dt 31/Jul/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx Kungarrekuwern\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de a place in fv:Kadjarngu clan estate near fv:Mankolekoweng (the 'jump-up' on the fv:Mumeka to\
fv:Marrkolidjban road. This name is also sometimes used to describe the now extinct clan of\
fv:kadjarngu people.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kungarrekuwern\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de alterntive name for the now extinct fi:duwa moiety clan fv:Kudjarngu near the confluence of the Liverpool and Mann Rivers\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kungkuh\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Bark of fi:Eucalyptus_tetrodonta.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Bark painting.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dolobbo\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kungolongkorr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de brolga creation ancestor with only one leg. Sacred site today is located in na-Kurulk clan estate near\
Kurrurldul.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kungolongorrbekombekombe\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014 \
\
\\lx Kungorobu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de large billabong in fv:Kunanganja clan estate which is a major magpie goose hunting area\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kungorroyo\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de An area on a creek that crosses the Gunbalanya to Nabarlek road in the Birrirddak Creek region.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 12/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kunj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de generic term for all macropods/kangaroos.\
\\ee Each species of macropod has a seperate name for the male and female. There is also a special verb\
which describes the running or hopping for male and female of each kangaroo species . These are as\
follows: Karndakidj-fv:ka-mawudme Karndayh- fv:ka-djarrwahme Wolerrk- fv:ka-murlbadme\
Karlkberd- fv:ka-njedjme Kornobolo- fv:ka-lurlhlurlme Na-djanem and Djukerre- same as for wolerrk.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kunj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de kangaroo, generic term\
\\pdn kk = molarrinj\
\
\\lx Kunj Bolkdjowk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\uv E\
\\de place in fv:Balngarra clan estate, lit."kangaroo crossing"\
\\ee duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kunjkurlba\
\\ps n.\
\\lit 'kangaroo blood'\
\\re purple currant tree\
\\re fi:Antidesma_ghaesembila\
\\de Purple currant tree.\
\\sc Antidesma ghaesembila\
\\uv Kune Na-rayek\
\\ur Kune Na-kerlk, I =man-djulukkurn\
\\ee Whilst this is the usual name for this plant in Kune Na-rayek dialect, it is also used in other dialects as a nickname due to the association of the fruit of this plant with a kind of sorcery which is used to hunt kangaroos.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kunjngukbarrk\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Pityrodia\
\\re fi:Pityrodia_angustisepala\
\\de kind of pityrodia shrub which is used for making firestick drills\
\\xv An-kunjngukbarrk arri-marnbuni kun-darleh.\
\\xe We used to make firestick drills from the fi:Pityrodia_angustisepala shrub.\
\\sc Pityrodia angustisepala\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\sd plant\
\\p ankunjngukbarrk/Pityrodia sp.jpg\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kurdadj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de blood\
\\pde kun-kurlba\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kurdda\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pavetta.sp.\
\\re fi:Pavetta_brownii\
\\de kind of small tree, the leaves are highly desired by various kangaroos such as euros\
\\xv An-kurdda, kalkberd ka-ngun kun-worr.\
\\xe The euro eats the leaves of the fi:Pavetta_brownii tree.\
\\sc Pavetta brownii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kurddal\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de The hill which is called 'Table Hill' in fv:Marrin clan estate. It is a fv:Namorrorddo or shooting star\
sacred site.\
\\ee yirridjdja.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kurddu\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de blue berry bush food tree, grows in monsoon vine forest\
\\sc Elaeocarpus arnhemicus\
\\ee fruits in dry season, purple berries eaten.\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj fv:an-gurddu= fi:Strychnos_lucida\
\\dt 11/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx kurddu\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Cryptocarya.tree\
\\re fi:Cryptocarya_cunninghamii\
\\de tree (5-15m) which grows in monsoon vine forest habitats and has a poisonous black fruit.\
\\xv An-kurddu an-bang anekke.\
\\xe The fi:Cryptocarya_cunninghamii tree is poisonous.\
\\sc Cryptocarya cunninghamii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-binjdjarrang. In Kundjeyhmi fv:an-kurddu = fi:Strychnos_lucida\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kurddukarri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de fishing place in fv:Kurulk clan estate on tributary of Mann River\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kurdih\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge joke.interj.\
\\re joking response interjection\
\\de Response to joking or teasing as a way of excusing offence or expressing sympathy. Used with brother-in-law, father/son, and cousins.\
\\cf see fv:barlmarded\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurdihme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de use the interjection fv:kurdih after swearing or an embarrassing comment.\
\\cf see fv:kurdih.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurdihno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge unmentionable\
\\re unmentionable thing (rude or secret)\
\\de Euphamistic term to refer to sexually explicit topics (e.g. genitalia, sexual acts) or secret sacred objects which cannot be mentioned in public.\
\\xv Aa ah bininj wanjh \'91rude\'92 kabani-marneyimerren. Kek, kure kurdihno karrimen.\
\\xe [Looking at rock art images of male and female figures engaged in sexual behaviour]. That human image is two people doing something rude. Oh dear, there's the rude bits there.\
\\dt 15/Jan/2013\
\
\\lx kurdu\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Public ceremonial dancing of a large group.\
\\xv Bininj na-wern kabirri-borrkke kun-kurdu.\
\\xe Lot's of people dance for public ceremony.\
\
\\lx kurduhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de become lost\
\\xv Ngad ngarri-wam kun-kare ngarri-kurduhmeng wardi man-kabo ngan-nameng ngadberre wanjh ngarri-kurduhmeng.\
\\xe We went a long time ago and got lost where that river blocked us and we got lost.\
\\sn 2\
\\de confused\
\\xv Ngarr-nan kun-wok yika kan-kodjdong ngarr-kurduhmeng.\
\\xe Sometimes we see some words that confuse us and we can't work out what they mean.\
\\sn 3\
\\de attempt to pass through a place but be frustrated due to the ruggedness of the terrain or the height and sheerness of a descent/cliff face\
\\xv Kangalkwarre karrikurduhme, kangalkmak karrikolung.\
\\xe A difficult/sheer cliff face cannot be negotiated, but on a gentle slope/descent, we can walk down easily.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurduk\
\\ps adj.\
\\de black, dark coloured, stained\
\\xv yi-kurduk\
\\xe you are black\
\\cf kun-ngolkurduk\
\\ce thunder clouds\
\
\\lx kurdukadji\
\\ps n.\
\\ge emu\
\\re emu\
\\re fi:Dromaius_novaehollandiae\
\\de Emu\
\\xv Ngalkudji ngalkohbanj kuni ngalkangila wanjh ngaleng kangeyyo kurdukadji kaluk ngaleng wanjh bininjni korrokko wanjh yerre mayh yimerranj.\
\\xe There was an old lady whose skin name was Ngalkangila and now we call her emu, a long time ago she was really an old lady. [Wildfire Band song text].\
\\uv W\
\\ur I, Djnj= ngurrurdu, Kdj= alwandjuk, E= wurrbbarn\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\\sc Dromaius novaehollandiae\
\\uv E= wurrbbarn, I=ngurrurdu, Kdj= alwandjuk\
\\pdn kk = kurduyulu\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx Kurdukadji Dedjbarlkarrhmeng\
\\va Ngurrurdu Dedjbarlkarrhmeng\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de This is an important emu djang (Dreaming site) widely known throughout West Arnhem Land. Kurdukadji Dedjbarlkarrhmeng means literally \'91emu slipped on her arse [when dodging a spear]\'92, kurdukadji and ngurrurdu being alternative words for \'91emu\'92. It lies around 2.5km due west of the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River on a vast stone plain. The site consists of a stone arrangement in the shape of an emu which has been in this location \'91since the Dreaming\'92 when the Emu placed herself here. The stones can become dislodged over the years and it is the responsibility of visiting Bininj (preferably senior knowledgeable men) to put them back into shape when visiting the site. An increase ritual can be performed here which consists of whipping the stones with a branch whilst calling out the names of places where you wish to see emu numbers increase. fi:Calytrix_brownii trees also indicate the spot where the Dreaming is. \
The site is on an important fv:Bininj_manbolh \'91traditional walking route\'92 between Mararrkiwu and Kambukkakarung.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kurduwala\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Kunwinjku patriclan\
\\xv Medjekel kun-bolkngeykimuk bedberre Kurduwala. \
\\xe Medjekel is the regional estate name for the Kurduwala clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kurduyurlu\
\\ps n.\
\\de emu\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde ngurrurdu (E), kurdukadji (W)\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kure\
\\ps loc.\
\\re there\
\\re at\
\\re on\
\\de Variant of kore, \'91on, at, there\'92.\
\\xv \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kabale kure kunu Mokmek.\
\\xe He goes all the way there to Mokmek.\
\\xv Ka-kolung kure kanjdji ka-bomang ka-bongun kam-bokan.\
\\xe She goes down [to the creek] and gets water, she drinks and comes back bringing water.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\\uv I\
\\ur W= kore\
\
\\lx kurenj\
\\ps loc.\
\\re there\
\\de There, at that place known to you or previously mentioned.\
\\xv Yo, yi-bun kurenj Kubumi ngune-wokdi. School one nameke yi-bun.\
\\xe Yes, make a phone call to Kubumi and you two can talk. Ring the school phone.\
\\dt 17/Sep/2016\
\
\cf2 \\lx kurih\
\\ps loc.\
\\re over there\
\\de Over there.\
\\xv Benebalwam wanjh ngalkudji nang nganabbarru yimeng, "Warddaw, nanih kahdi nabang, dja kurih ngarre ngarrdjowkke kore mankabo."\
\\xe They walked a bit further and one of them saw a buffalo. \'93Oh no!\'94 she said, \'93There\'92s a dangerous animal, let\'92s go over there and cross the river\'94. \
\\so Maralangurra, Dolly, \'91Reader 36\'92, Oenpelli Literature Production Centre, 1981\
\\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx kurladj\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\va man-kurladjdjakel\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spike.rush\
\\re spike rush\
\\re fi:Eleocharis_dulcis\
\\de spike rush and edible corms\
\\xv Bamurru lamno kangun ankurladj, bininj warridj.\
\\xe Magpie geese eat the corms and so do people.\
\\sc Eleocharis dulcis\
\\pdn man-dayhmornmorndi\
\\uv I, W, Djnj\
\\sy I= mewo\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kurladjdjakel\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de spike rush and corms of spike rush\
\\sc Eleocharis dulcis\
\
\\lx kurlah\
\\pr kun-\
\\va kurlahno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 1\
\\de outer layer\
\\xv Kurlahno karri-we.\
\\xe We throw the skin away.\
\\sn 2\
\\de kinship subsection\
\\xv Njale yi-karrme kun-kurlah?\
\\xe What is your kinship subsection (skin)?\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx kurlahbang\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Austrodolichos.sp.\
\\re fi:Austrodolichos_errabundus\
\\de kind of trifoliate vine with edible carrot-shaped tuber\
\\xv Marlkawo ka-mirnderri an-kurlahbang, karri-karung karri-ngolung karri-kurlahwe.\
\\xe At Marlkawo there are lots of fv:ankurlahbang plants and we dig them up and roast them and remove the skin.\
\\sc Austrodolichos errabundus\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kurlahbirmo\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge hard.skin\
\\re hard skin (of fruit)\
\\de having hard skin (of fruit, seed or nut casing)\
\\sy (m)an-kurlahrayek\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kurlahbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de remove the skin\
\\xv Kured birrih-ni birri-kurlahbom djila.\
\\xe They stayed at home and they skinned and salted (the buffalo hides).\
\
\\lx kurlahlurlmeng\
\\ps v.\
\\de swelling\
\
\\lx kurlahngerrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become bruised\
\
\\lx kurlahnjirrhme\
\\ps adj.\
\\de gleaming or shining skin\
\\dv Karri-kuk-barabarme.\
\
\\lx kurlahweleberrkmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become wrinkled\
\
\\lx kurlba\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de blood\
\\pdn kk = kun-kurdadj.\
\
\\lx kurlbare\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge bleed\
\\re bleed\
\\de Bleed.\
\\xv Birri-kodjbadjdjerrinj wanjh birrih-kurlbawam.\
\\xe They punched each other in the head and then they bled.\
\\dt 19/Jun/2013\
\
\\lx kurlbbinj\
\\ps n.\
\\de black ant bed\
\\xv kurlbbinj na-ngurlmeng\
\\xe black antbed\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= djibdjib\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurlbungkurlbung\
\\ps n.\
\\ge golfball.frog\
\\re golfball frog\
\\re Notaden melanoscaphus\
\\de Northern spadefoot toad?\
\\xv Kurlbungkurlbung yika kukawadj karri-ngalke.\
\\xe Sometimes we find the golf ball frog in the sand.\
\\sc Notaden melanoscaphus\
\\uv E, Djnj\
\\so DG\
\\ee Kukurlk ka-dudjendi.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurlh\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de vomitus\
\
\\lx kurlhkurlhme\
\\cf see fv:kurlhme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurlhme\
\\va kurlhkurlhme\
\\ps v. i.\
\\de make thumping noise when running or jumping, frequently used of kangaroos hopping.\
\\xv Ngabekkang kukak barrk ba-kurlhmi.\
\\xe I heard the black wallaroo thumping around in the night.\
\\cf kurlhmire\
\\ce move around making a thumping noise\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurlhmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de move around making a thumping noise, especially kangaroos when they hop\
\\xv Kukak karribekkan kunj ka-kurlmire, ka-djarrhmire.\
\\xe At night we'll hear kangaroos thumping as they hop around, rustling the grass.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx kurlhwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de be successful in a hunting expedition, obtain large amounts of game. Kill 'too much' food.\
\\xv Yi-kurlhweng kurluban.\
\\xe You caught a lot of flying fox.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurlk\
\\ps n.\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps\
\\sn 1\
\\ge soil\
\\re soil\
\\re dirt\
\\re earth\
\\de dirt, soil, earth\
\\sn 2\
\\ge ground\
\\re ground\
\\de ground\
\\xv Ngayi Mehme kondanj, konda ngah-ni ku-kurlk.\
\\xe I am the stubble quail, and I live on the ground.\
\\pdn kun-kabuy\
\\ur W= kun-rorre\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, I, E, W\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx kurlkngerrme\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge red soil\
\\re soil, red\
\\de red soil\
\\ng\
\\xv Kure Mokmek ka-kurlkngerrme.\
\\xe At Mokmek, there is red soil.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd geographic\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx kurlkngurlme\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge soil, black\
\\re soil, black\
\\de black soil\
\\ng\
\\xv\
\\xe\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd geographic\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx kurlkurlh\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.nervosa\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_nervosa\
\\de kind of paperbark tree\
\\xv An-korrko, an-kurlkurlh lorlbban nuye.\
\\xe The Melaleuca argentea and the fi:Melaleuca_nervosa belong to the fv:lorlbban honey bees [for nectar].\
\\sc Melaleuca nervosa\
\\sd plant\
\\sy (m)an-birdubirdu\
\\uv Djnj, E\
\\ur I= man-birdubbirdu\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kurlkurlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de run\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde lobme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kurlngunj\
\\ps adj.\
\\de black\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bulerri\
\\dt 20/Apr/2015\
\
\\lx kurlngunj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de plant which has small black berries\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-mimkurduk\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kurlngunjweybun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr kurlngunj \'91black\'92 + weybun \'91give\'92\
\\de blacken\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bulerriwon\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kurlumudduk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de lily\
\\sc Crinum asiaticum/uniflorum\
\
\\lx kurlurrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Memecylon pauciflorum\
\\ee 'yiman grapes' (fruit like grapes)\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurlwirri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de giant fan palm (up to 20m)\
\\xv Kurlwirri, kurlahno arringun murrngno arriwe.\
\\xe We eat the skin of the fruit of the giant fan palm and throw away the pit.\
\\sc Corypha elata\
\
\\lx kurndalh\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Vitex.glabrata\
\\re black currant tree\
\\re fi:Vitex_glabrata\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of medium sized tree (7-12m) with edible black berries available late dry to wet season\
\\xv Man-kurndalh birri-barndiwirrinj kam-wakemeninj birri-yameninj. Manekke nga-yameng wanjh barnambarl.\
\\xe They would stand up high in the Vitex_glabrata tree and when [the emu] came wandering over [to eat the fallen fruit] they would spear\
it. I speared one from up in a tree, a technique called fv:barnambarl.\
\\sc Vitex glabrata\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, W, I, E\
\\p Vitex glabrata@Yirrirnbudduk.2.jpg  \
\\pdv man-kulngunj\
\\dt 23/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx kurndi\
\\ps n.\
\\de wichetty grub\
\
\\lx kurndun\
\\ge Flacourtia.territorialis\
\\re fi:Flacourtia territorialis\
\\de Kind of native cherry. The red and black fruits are available through the wet season fv:kunumeleng to fv:kudjewk\
\\sc Flacourtia territorialis\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 08/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx kurndje\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term. eg.,1.my younger brother, your grandson, you are my mother's father. 2.my\
younger brother, your father, you are my auntie (father's sister)\
\\cn Na-djumu.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurndjewarre\
\\pr na-, ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kundebi\
\\re kundebi term\
\\sn 1\
\\de My younger sister or brother, your brother/sister-in-law, you are my husband. The reciprocal term is na-djumuwarre / ngal-djumuwarre.\
\\sn 2\
\\de My younger brother, your na-kurrng, you are my na-kurrng.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 20/Jun/2013\
\
\\lx kurndjewurd\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my brother, your fv:kakkak, we call each other fv:kakkak.\
\\cn na-djumuwurd\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurndjilk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re fi:Heteropogon_triticeus\
\\de Kind of cane grass sometimes referred to as 'bush sugar cane' because of the sugary juice it contains.\
\\sc Heteropogon triticeus\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= mayadjdja, Kdj= djilidjili\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 24/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kurnhdirridj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place shared between Karadjdjarrngu and fv:Wakmarranj clans\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kurnu\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de shade\
\\pde kun-djurle\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Kurnumbidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\cf see fv:Kunumbidj\
\\dt 18/Jan/2016\
\
\\lx Kurnumeleng\
\\ps n.\
\\cf see fv:Kunumeleng\
\\dt 29/Apr/2015\
\
\\lx Kuralilboy\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Hill with one rocky slope in the Maburrinj estate, an Ubarr ceremony site. South of Ngabakyerrbinj and around 6km east of the Goomadeer River, where it makes a sharp right-angle turn to the north following the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kurawen\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de billabong in Born clan estate near Marrkolidjban community.\
\
\\lx Kuraweng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djok clan estate\
\
\\lx kure\
\\va kore\
\\ps prep.\
\\de at, on, towards, with, this way, to\
\
\\lx Kurorrh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate, this is the actual road crossing of fv:Mimanjarr creek on the Maningrida\
road.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kurulk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan on the lower and middle Mann River\
\\xv Yoh, Kabarrebarre, birri-koluyi, birri-niwirrinj. La bedberre kun-red, Kela,Kela, Kela, Wamud. Yoh, bedberre kun-red.\
Birri-kurulk. \
\\xe Yes, they went down to Kabarrebarre (on the Mann River) and stayed there. It was all their country, Kela, Kela, Kela and Wamud. Yes\
all of those people of Kurulk clan.\
\\ee fi:yikurrumu clan equivalents are fv:Kandadjdja, fv:Manayamarra and fv:Wurrkku.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\\lx kururrk\
\\ps loc.\
\\de inside an enclosed space\
\\cf kun-rurrk, rurrkno, 'an enclosed space'\
\\va W=kururrkbaybay, kurrun.\
\
\\lx kururrkbaybay\
\\ps loc\
\\de inside an enclosed space\
\
\\lx kurra\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de\
\\sy narddo\
\\sc Hakea arborescens\
\
\\lx kurra\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de wind (generic)\
\\pdn kk = kun-mawul\
\\ee yirridjdja/Yabburdurrwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kurrabun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd weather\
\\de wind blowing\
\\xv Bu ka-kurrabun marrek ka-re, ka-kom-dadjme, konda kun-kom nuye.\
\\xe If the wind is blowing they don't go out (the mimih), because the their necks would break here at their\
necks.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurradadjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd weather\
\\de wind stop blowing\
\\xv Mimih kabirri-djangkan and ka-djare ka-djangkan nungka ka-djangkan ka-kurradadjme\
ka-bebme kare.\
\\xe Mimih like to hunt and when the wind stops blowing, they come out and go off.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrambalk\
\\ps n.\
\\de house\
\\sy kodbarre, also kun-rurrk\
\
\\lx Kurrarrme\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate. Wallaby sacred site fv:kornobolo_djang. Also a fv:Nakorrkko ancestor site.\
\\xv Kumando kaddum la Kurrarrme kanjdji. Kinga ka-yo.\
\\xe Kumando is up from Kurrarrme which is further downstream. There's crocodiles there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Kurrarrme\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de plain country near fv:Kumando\
\\ee "Too much fish."\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrbele\
\\ps n.\
\\de cold\
\\xv Kurrbele nga-ngarirrihme.\
\\xn Kunbonjdjek nga-rrowen.\
\\xe I'm really cold.\
\\xv Kurrbele kan-bonghme man-djil.\
\\xn Kunbonjdjek kan-bun man-djewk.\
\\xe The rain makes us cold.\
\\pdv kk\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kurren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de lie\
\\xv Bolkki ngan-marne-yimeng,"ngam-re kure ngudda." Kare kurrinj.\
\\xe Today he said,"I'll come over to your place." Maybe he was lying.\
\\sn 2\
\\de pretend\
\\xv Yun yi-nalkbun minj yi-rrowen yi-rrolkka yi-kurren.\
\\xe Stop crying, your not sick, get up, your pretending.\
\
\\lx kurrhminame\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de place string, rope or bag strap over shoulders as when putting on a ceremonial harness or back pack.\
\\xv Koroyil birri-kurrhminameng Wubarr-ken.\
\\xe They placed ceremonial harnesses over their shoulders for the Wubarr ceremony.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurri\
\\va kurrih\
\\ps n.\
\\ge blue-tongued.skink\
\\re blue-tongued lizard\
\\re northern blue-tongued skink\
\\de northern blue-tongued skink\
\\xv Kurrih Birrangdoy bewubeh kurrih djang kumekke yirdebmeng bi-rrangdoy mankang.\
\\xe At Kurrih Birrangdoy there on the far side there, is a totemic site where the blue-tongued skink slipped and struck his tongue when he fell.\
\\sc Tiliqua scincoides intermedia\
\\sy molerl\
\\pdn kk = milhdarl(h)\
\\uv W, I, Kdj\
\\ur E= molerlh, milhdarl, Djnj = milhdarl\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de resin of fv:man-djoh or Acacia difficilis (or a similar acacia)\
\
\\lx kurrkabal\
\\ps n. \
\\ge longtom\
\\re freshwater longtom\
\\de Freshwater longtom.\
\\xv Korroko dabborrabbolk birri-wodbuni nahni kunwardde kurrkabal djang.\
\\xe A long time ago the old people used to do an increase ceremony by hitting this rock with branches [which is] a totemic site for the freshwater longtom.\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= karlerrh, Kdj= burrukulung\
\\sc Strongylura kreffti\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 20/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx kurrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\de pulverised food usually produced with a grindstone.\
\
\\lx kurrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de pith of palm trees which is edible\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx kurrkurrbi\
\\ps n.\
\\de duwa moiety dialect name for very large specimens of cat fish fv:ngadjdjelek.\
\\xv kurrkurrbi murrngno kakarrme bukkarnno.\
\\ee The fv:kurrkurrbi cat fish has two dots called fv:bukkarnno or fv:dinjhno at the end of its caudal area which are characteristic of the bones or fv:murrngno in this fish. Sacred site at Korlng Karri in Kurulk clan estate.\
\\cf see fv:ngadjdjelek\
\\ee ngal-kimuk\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrkurrbme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge twitch\
\\re twitch\
\\re vellicate\
\\de vellicate (short convulsive jerking or twitch of a particular part of the body); nervous or involuntary twitch taken as a sign that a relative is approaching or some other significant event is occurring to the relevant kin. If the arm twitches it signals the arrival of mother's father fv:mamamh or in-law fv:kanjok. If the upper leg twitches it signals the approaching of fv:na-kurrng or fv:ngal-kurrng. A twitching in the back of the thigh indicates the arrival of fv:berlu, fv:ngadjadj, fv:kakkak or fv:mawah. Twitching in the front of the thigh refers to fv:kangkinj and twitching in the eye or hip refers to spouse or fv:kanjok. Twitching in the lower leg refers to a sibling.\
\\xv Nga-berlkurrkurrbme, kareh mamamh kam-re.\
\\xe My arm is twitching, maybe my mother's father (or a man's daughter's child) is coming.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrkurrbme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de stab or poke someone (or an animal) resulting in convulsive recoiling\
\\xv Bi-kurrkurrbmeng.\
\\xe He stabbed her (and she recoiled in a jerky convulsion).\
\\sn 2\
\\ge shake\
\\re shake\
\\re recoil\
\\re jerk convulsively\
\\de shake an object e.g. such as a blanket to remove dust or sand.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de put or place\
\\pdn kk = djarrberlke\
\
\\lx kurrng\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de speech style used with those called fv:na-kurrng or fv:ngal-kurrng which includes both a special register of language used in avoidance relationships (also sometimes referred to as 'mother-in-law'language) and the style of speech used by those in joking relationships.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrng\
\\pr na-\
\\va na-kurrngh (voc.)\
\\ps n.\
\\de son-in-law (of female), mother's brother of actual or classificatory spouse, 'cousin', MMBS, MMBSSS\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrng\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my cousin ie. fv:na-kurrng/ngal-kurrng, your nephew/niece, we call each other\
fv:kakkak.\
\\cn na-kurrng ke/ngal-kurrng ke.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrng\
\\pr ngal-\
\\va ngal-kurrngh (voc., although a man would rarely directly address his actual mother-in- law)\
\\ps n.\
\\de mother-in-law (real or classificatory), 'cousin', MMBD, MMBSSD.\
\\pdn kk = -binjkurrng\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrng ke\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my nephew, your 'cousin' or fv:na-kurrng, you and I call each other\
fv:mamamh.\
\\cn na-kurrng ngarduk\
\\sn 2\
\\de My nephew, your cousin ie. fv:na-kurrng, we call each other fv:kakkak.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrng ke\
\\pr ngal-\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my niece, your aunty or fv:berlu, we call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn ngal-kurrng ngarduk.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrng ngarduk\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my 'cousin' or fv:na-kurrng, your nephew, you and I call each other\
fv:mamamh.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrng ngarduk\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term eg. my fv:berlu or aunty, your niece, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn ngal-kurrng ke.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrnginj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de sweat, perspiration\
\
\\lx kurrnginjbalhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de perspire\
\
\\lx kurrngko\
\\pr PRON\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de kin reference term to refer to people in relationship of fv:na-kurrng/ngal-kurrng.\
\
\\lx kurrngkohkurrngko\
\\pr plural pronoun.\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de a reference term relating to a group of people who are in fv:-kurrng relationship\
\\xv Birri-kurrngkohkurrngko kun-darok kabirri-marrngalahmerren.\
\\xe People who call each other na-kurrng/ngal-kurrng are listening to each other talk.\
\
\\lx kurrubu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge male.euro\
\\re euro, male\
\\re kangaroo, male euro\
\\re fi:Macropus_robustus\
\\de male euro kangaroo\
\\sc Macropus robustus\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 14/Feb/2014\
\
\\lx Kurrubulan\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate but close to fv:Yikarrakkal\
\\xv Kurrubulan kun-ngad ka-yo\
\\xe There's a spring at fv:Kurrubulan.\
\
\\lx kurruburlah\
\\va kurrub\'9crlah, kurrubirlah\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de bush thick-knee or bush stone-curlew\
\\sc Burhinus grallarius\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= kurruwirluk, Djnj= kurrubirlah\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrudjardu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge olive.python\
\\re olive python\
\\re fi:Lialis_olivaceus\
\\de Olive python.\
\\uv Kdj\
\\ur mandjurdu\
\\ur Kdj= alngururrkmanj, kurrudjardu\
\\ee Toby Gangale (Kundjeyhmi, late 1980s) says fv:mandjudu is from 'another Top End language', and that correct Kdj word is fv:alngururrkmanj.\
\\pdn kk = ngalwernyi\
\\sc Lialis olivaceus\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\
\\lx Kurrudjmuk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A hill (179m) around 8 km southwest of Mamardawerre outstation on the west side of the Goomadeer [Kumadderr] river. The hill is visible from a great distance, and the region is sometimes referred to by reference to this site. Believed to be the dwelling of a fv:namorrorddo or \'91shooting star spirit\'92, a malevolent being that preyed on children. No one is to eat meat at night near the base of the hill, let alone climb the hill at night as the fv:namorrorddo would kill any boys in the camp. Some however believe this spirit no longer resides there. There is a named site at the summit of Kurrudjmuk Hill called Naworrmokorrmo.\
\\xv Kawarddedjabdi namorrorddo na-bangni di yiman ka-yime Kurrudjmuk.\
\\xe A dangerous fv:namorrorddo lived at the column of rock similar to the one at Kurrudjmuk.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kurruh\
\\ps interj.\
\\sn 1.\
\\de An interjection used by Kune dialect speakers as a marker of dialect affiliation, similar to Kundangwok interjections, but has lost any\
identification with a particular patriclan.\
\\xv Kurruh kandi-dadjung man-me.\
\\xe Give me some food.\
\\xv Kurruh bih!\
\\xe Hey, do what I ask!\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Kune.dialect\
\\re language variety label\
\\de a label used by Kuninjku speakers to refer to the Kune dialect.\
\\xv Nawu Buluh Karduru, kurruh kabirri-yime.\
\\xe Those Kune dialect people at Buluh Karduru, who use the word 'kurruh'.\
\\uv E\
\\dt 08/May/2007\
\
\\lx kurruhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge say.'kurruh'\
\\re use the word 'kurruh' as a linguistic identity marker\
\\de use the term fv:'kurruh' in speech such as speakers of the Kune dialect of Bininj Kunwok speakers do.\
\\xv Nawu bedda kabirri-kurruhme.\
\\xe Those people who use the word 'kurruh' [i.e. the Kune dialect speakers].\
\\dt 08/May/2007\
\
\\lx kurruk\
\\ps n.\
\\re freshwater mussel\
\\re fi:Velesunio_angasi\
\\de Freshwater bivalve mussel\
\\ee Food for people and also false water rats fv:yirrkbadj. The fv:Kune and fv:Rembarrnga have mythology that tells of mussels that fly around at night eating the flowers of fv:Melaleuca trees.\
\\sc Velesunio angasi\
\\sy djerlkerd\
\\pdn kk= ngambalalak\
\\uv I, E, Kdj\
\\ur W= kanobirr, Kundedjwarre lect= barndjarr.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Kurruk Kanini\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Kurrukkurrh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Homeland Centre community in fv:Djalama clan estate known in English as 'Table Hill'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kurrukurlanj\
\\va kurrukurldanj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de orange-footed scrub fowl, black hen\
\\sc Megapodius reinwardt\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I = ngalkodjdjorrhmi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrulambidj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge agile.wallaby\
\\re agile wallaby (male)\
\\de male agile wallaby\
\\xv Merlbbe, ya na-rangem kurrulambidj. Kune kayime ngarri-wokdi Kundedjnjenghmi fs:all_kind. Badkurruyul nawu\
nabarlek yi-bengkan na-kimuk, badkurruyul.\
\\xe The female agile wallaby is called fv:merlbbe and the male fv:kurrulambidj. That's what we say in Kundedjnjenghmi, all kinds (of\
names). A big nabarlek is called badkurruyul.\
\\so LBN\
\\sc Macropus agilis\
\\cf kornobolo\
\\ce agile wallaby (generic i.e. both sexes)\
\\cf merlbbe\
\\ce female agile wallaby\
\\pdn kk = njamdjorrhdjorrh\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I, E= warradjangkal\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx kurrulkwern\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de bush, forest\
\
\\lx kurrun\
\\ps loc\
\\de inside\
\\xv Kurrun ka-yo mimih kuwardde.\
\\xe Mimih live inside rocks.\
\\uv Some eastern dialect speakers use this word but others say it is western dialect ie. Kunwinjku.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrung\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de the 'build-up' season, very hot and humid\
\\xv kurrung karri-denge-rung\
\\xe In the build-up our feet burn.\
\\pdn kk = karri-morrangamen.\
\
\\lx kurrurdme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de see\
\\xv Nga-kurrurdmeng molarrinj.\
\\xn Nga-nang daluk.\
\\xe I saw a woman.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde nan\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kurrurla\
\\ps n.\
\\de salt water, the ocean\
\
\\lx Kurrurldurl\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Small outstation community in fv:na-kurulk country. Crow ancestor sacred site.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx kurrurruk\
\\ps n.\
\\re visitation for food\
\\de Visitation with the intention of asking for food. This has a positive connotation unlike the Australian English term \'91bludging\'92 but rather a social visit to ask for food based on the shared assumption that there are good relations between those asking and those giving. \
\\xv Kurrurruk karri-kurulre karri-nan.\
\\xe Let\'92s go and visit someone to ask for food and have a look around.\
\\sd 17/Mar/2015\
\
\\lx Kurrawa\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area of savanna plain in the Maburrinj estate, south of Mirurr against the escarpment. An important emu hunting site where emus would come down to drink and people would spear them. On the border of the Maburrinj estate, the next sites to the east-northeast being Kunkeldjarrke and Ngalurdbirrhmi in the Kumarrirnbang estate. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\cf2 \\lx kurrurrubun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re tie up fish to carry\
\\de Tie up fish with string or rope in order to carry them.\
\\xv Yika kunyarl kayarlkan djenjkenh kakukkurrurrubun.\
\\xe Sometimes he [Djidjnguk] takes string along so he can tie the fish together. \
\\so Andrew Manakgu, Injalak Arts painting documentation\
\\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx kurruwirluk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de bush thick-knee or bush stone-curlew\
\\sc Burhinus grallarius\
\\uv Kune= kurruburlah\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx kurrworr\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de ? seen at fv:Manbulukarrii\
\\so JI\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kuwalili\
\\va kuwalilil\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bony.bream\
\\re bony bream\
\\re fi:Nematalosa_erebi\
\\de bony bream; sometimes also used for mullet (or is this mididentification?)\
\\sc Nematalosa erebi\
\\ur W\
\\uv Kdj= karlalbba\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 30/Oct/2011\
\
\\lx kuwam\
\\ps abbreviation\
\\re went there (abbreviation)\
\\ge 3sg.went_there\
\\de he or she went there\
\\ng this is a connected speech abbreviation of two words fv:kumekke_wam\
\\xv Mabarrabbarra dolkkang kuwam korrkkeng, kayakki.\
\\xe The bar shouldered dove got up went over and tried to lance (the infected sore) but couldn't.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kuwan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de warm one's self by the fire\
\\xv Nga-rrenge-kuwan.\
\\xe I'll warm my feet by the fire.\
\
\\lx Kuwayuk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Hill east of the upper East Alligator River. A tributary meets the East Alligator here from the east at Kundjalerri Kayo, about 47km southeast of Cahill's Crossing. Kuwayuk is on the south side of this tributary valley, around 6km from the confluence. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx kuyal\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial grouping of the following subsections: bulanj/bulanjdjan, kodjok/kodjdjan kela/kalidjan,\
wamud/wamuddjan\
\\cf burddal\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx kuybibele\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de white-skinned person, non-aboriginal\
\\sn 2\
\\de bullock or cow\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde 1. balanda 2. bulukki.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kuybuk\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge banksia\
\\re banksia tree\
\\re Banksia_dentata\
\\sd plant\
\\de Banksia\
\\xv A: Kuybuk namekke ba ngarrbanbani-bukkan woh.  B: Woh karribirlikan wanjh.\
\\xe A: Let's show those two the banksia cones. B: Yes, they can carry fire with it then.\
\\ee The banksia infloresences called fv:djarlk are broken off and the ends are burnt as the cones will smoulder for many hours and are\
used to carry fire.\
\\sc Banksia dentata\
\\uv E, Djnj\
\\uv I =man-yalwerr\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Kuyburrukuk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Rock shelter south of Kudjekbinj outstation. The shelter is east of the creek that flows past Kudjekbinj outstation, on a point of rocky country about 4km upstream from the outstation. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Kuyedj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de A small hill in the Kunukdi estate, in the upper reaches of Mandedjkadjung Creek (Muralidbar Creek). It lies near a confluence of upper tributaries near Dulhma southeast of Demed Hill. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kuyeng\
\\ps adj.\
\\de long (of shape, form, time)\
\\xv Kun-kuyeng ngarri-madbom.\
\\xe We waited for a long time.\
\\xv Ngal-ngey-kuyengkuyeng.\
\\cf konemkuyeng\
\\ce tall, elongate\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx kuyenghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de extend time\
\\xv Yimarnek wolewoleh ngam-durndi la ngandi-marne-kuyenghmeng.\
\\xe I was supposed to come back yeasterday but they've made me stay for a long time.\
\
\\lx kuyin\
\\ps adv. pref.\
\\ge nearly\
\\re nearly\
\\re almost\
\\de nearly, almost\
\\xv Birri-kuyin-bom.\
\\xe They nearly killed him.\
\\xv Wanjh dingihdi di::, kuyin-bekkang 'mehme' yimeng, 'mehme konda mehme ah mehme, mehme, mehme', bi-yawam\
rawoyhno.\
\\xe Then he stood there for ages, and he could just hear the quail calling out. 'Oh quail is here, quail, quail, quail (where are you?)',....and he\
searched for him again.\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Kuyingawarra\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area just south of Kudjekbinj outstation\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx kuykbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spray\
\\xv Karri-kuykbonghme karri-banjinhme.\
\\xe Let's spray (paint) and cover ourselves.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kuykme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx kuykme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spray\
\\xv Kondah ka-rurrk-di ngan-kuykmeng man-djewk.\
\\xe There's a hole here where the rain is spraying in on me.\
\\xv dabborrabbolk kun-kare birri-bid-kuykmerrinj konda kure kun-wardde.\
\\xe A long time ago, the old people sprayed (ochre) over their fingers here on this rock.\
\\pdn kk = kuykbonghme\
\\nt check transitivity\
\
\\lx kuyno\
\\ps n.\
\\de resin, such as that in fv:man-karrarndalk grass or the tar in cigarettes.\
\
\\lx kuyuk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de knee\
\\pde kun-bard.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx la\
\\ps conjunc.\
\\de and\
\\xv Na-rangem la ngal-dahdaluk namekke wanjh birri-wam wanjh birri-wam kure\
birri-wurlebmeng.\
\\xe That boy and all the girls went to where they swam.\
\\xv Nangahnang dedjbom rowk malkno, nguneng, rdurdduno, derebadno, derebadno, nguneng\
bonj la wanjh kurrmeng la wam.\
\\xe He watched, cut all the guts up, he ate the liver, the heart, the kidneys, he ate the kidneys and then he put it there and off he went.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx labbarl\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de billabong, water hole\
\\pdn kk = man-labbarldjaweybun\
\\ng see also fv:kulabbarl\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx labbarlwern\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de swamp country, wetlands.\
\
\\lx lablab\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re Australian owlet-nightjar\
\\re fi:Aegotheles_cristatus\
\\de Australian owlet-nightjar\
\\sc Aegotheles cristatus\
\\syn nadjik\
\\sn 2\
\\ge nightjar\
\\re Spotted nightjar\
\\re fi:Eurostopodus_argus\
\\de Spotted nightjar.\
\\sc Eurostopodus argus\
\\sn 3\
\\ge nightjar\
\\re Large-tailed nightjar\
\\re fi:Caprimulgus_macrurus\
\\de Large-tailed nightjar.\
\\sc Caprimulgus macrurus\
\\uv I, Djnj, W\
\\ee Some speakers use the term fv:lablab as a generic term for all nightjars, although the australian owlet nightjar is more properly called fv:nadjik\
\\lf synonym\
\\lv dabodabo\
\\le large-tailed and spotted nightjar\
\\dint The synonym fv:dabodabo is also used to refer to the large-tailed and the spotted nightjars. It is not a proper name, but the call of the bird when it sings out 'dabodabo-dabodabo'.\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx labud\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de large male Agile Wallaby\
\\sc Macropus agilis.\
\\uv Kundedjwarre clan lect.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ladbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cause an intense physical sensation either pleasurable or painful.\
\\xv Kun-bele ngan-karrmeng ngan-mim-ladbom.\
\\xe That cramp was intense, it turned my eye.\
\\xv Bu karri-marnbun njamed murlbbu-ken karri-ladburren, yalmo karri-marnbun.\
\\xe When you set that thing for mice (mouse trap) it makes you feel intense, you have to set it carefully.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx laddum\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de sinker for fishing line\
\\sn 2\
\\de lead single shot used in a shotgun\
\\sn 3\
\\de circumcised\
\\va berd-laddum\
\\sy ka-rraykan 'circumcised'.\
\\bw from Makassarese and Bugis l\'b7dung 'sinker, plummet'.\
\
\\lx ladmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become hot from exertion or exposure to the sun.\
\\xv Bonj, karri-dokmen nga-ladminj.\
\\xe That's enough let's go home, I'm hot.\
\\pdn kk = morrangamen.\
\
\\lx ladjkurrungu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge initiate\
\\re initiate in Mardayin ceremony\
\\de Initiate or novice in Mardayin ceremony. Young men who have just been admitted to the Mardayin ceremony are addressed as fv:ladjgurrungu by others, especially their sisters and other female relatives.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\dt 15/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx lakadjamarra\
\\ps n. ceremonial\
\\de Name for women in fv:walk or 'young man' ceremony who act as licenced ceremonial clowns and skip around the camp with mock spears pretending to spear people, laughing, hooting and stealing food and tobacco from those attending the ceremony. The fv: lakadjamarra are classificatory mothers of the boys being circumcised.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lakadjamarra\
\\ps n.\
\\de name for women (actual or classificatory mothers of candidates in the ceremony) in fv:walk or 'young\
man' ceremony who act as licenced ceremonial clowns and skip around the camp with mock spears\
pretending to spear people and stealing food and cigarettes.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lakkayen-\
\\ps adv. pref.\
\\ge circumcised\
\\re circumcised\
\\de circumcised\
\\ng adverbial prefix as in ka-lakkayendi, ka-lakkayenyo 'circumcised'\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx lakkayenno\
\\ps n.\
\\mr lakkayen+no\
\\ge circumcised\
\\re circumcised\
\\de circumcised boy\
\\ng this noun is formed by adding a third person possessed suffix fv:no- to the adverbial prefix fv:lakkayen-\
\\xv Djuwarr makka anbodjamunni marrek nangale korroko danjbuyi. Babomelmeng, yiken 'all the young boy' nawu\
lakkayenno o yawurrinj djawurrkyakni marrek kubomelmeng.\
\\xe At Djuwarr, the water was once sacred, no one was allowed to spear [fish] there. All the young boys and men, such as those [newly]\
circumcised or without facial hair, they were not allowed to walk in that water.\
\\sd body part\
\\uv Djnj\
\\so Bardayal Nadjamerrek, Worrgorl site survey file\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx lakkayenwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr lakkayen+won 'circumcised+give'\
\\ge circumcise\
\\re circumcise\
\\de circumcise\
\\xv Ngayi nawu wurdyaw ngarduk, dja karrangh kayime konda kunred. Nakka wam kun-kuk bulerriken, bu\
birri-lakkayenwong.  \
\\xe But my son, this is his mother's country here and so he went to be circumcised in the traditional way in his father's country.  He went\
to be circumcised by an Aboriginal man.\
\\un This is a more polite term than synonym terms such as fv:berddjobke or fv:berddadjke\
\\sd body part\
\\so Margaret from Manmoyi\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx lala\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de flat stone used as a base to grind foods\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx lalarl\
\\ps n.\
\\re black-breasted buzzard\
\\re fi:Hamirostra_melanosternon\
\\de Black-breasted buzzard. These birds lift stones or pieces of wood and drop them on emu eggs to break them.\
\\xv Lalarl ka-rrabubehke kun-dulkyih ka-mang ka-rrabudalhme, kun-dengeyih. Ngalekke.\
\\xe The black-breasted buzzard uses a piece of wood with its claw to break open the [emu] egg. Like that.\
\\sc Hamirostra melanosternon\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 17/Sep/2014\
\
\\lx lama\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de iron or stone spear head such as that in fv:barrawu. Used as a secondary term.\
\\bw possible loan from Malay lamang 'a short sabre'.\
\\pdn kk = djerrkudmiken\
\
\\lx lambalk\
\\ps n.\
\\re lambalk glider\
\\re sugar glider\
\\re fi:Petaurus_breviceps\
\\de Lambalk glider. The adoption of the Bininj Gunwok name for this species which is usually known as the sugar glider is tentative but the glider in the Kakadu and Western Arnhem Land region is genetically and physiologically different to sugar gliders in other parts of Australia.\
\\sc Petaurus breviceps\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx lambarra\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de an uncle who in fact is a father-in-law, ie. his daughter could become a second choice marriage partner\
to 'ego'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lambarri-\
\\va lambarr-\
\\ps verbal positional prefix\
\\re lying on back\
\\de Lying on one's back.\
\\se lambarriyo\
\\de Lying on its back.\
\\xv Yilambarriyun!\
\\xe Lie on your back!\
\\se lambarrikurrme\
\\de Place on back.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\xv Mimih, kawarddeborledke kalambarrkurrme kabimbun kayakwon wanjh kawarddedjabname.\
\\xe The mimih spirits move the rock face and place it down on the ground, do their paintings and then put the rocks back up into place.\
\\xv Maitbi kukno o ... yo kukno. Ba-lambarrkurrmeng wanjh kabarri-kinje.\
\\xe Maybe it\'92s a kangaroo ready for cooking\'85 yes, it is, it\'92s not cooked. It has been placed on its back and then they cook it.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \\xv Benedjaldolhmeng benelambarrkurrmeng manbu manekke kubbunj.\
\\xe The two of them surfaced from under the water and overturned that canoe.\cf0 \
\\dt 23/Nov/2013\
\
\\lx Lambirra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Kune/Dangbon fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan to the north-east of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Namarden djang bedberre birri-Lambirra.\
\\xe Lightning is a dreaming totem for the Lambirra clan.\
\\xv Kornnokah, Bamarrkon, Barrunu bolklambirra rowk.\
\\xe Kornnokah, Bamarrkon and Barrunu are all places in the Lambirra clan estate.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx lambuwa\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de axe\
\\pde kun-djila\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Larlak\
\\va Larlakoyoh ??\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Barabba clan estate (check)\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx larldulme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de landscape feature where there is a slight rise or bump in the ground. Often the result of a dreaming\
under the ground, causing the ground to swell.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx larlhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge break.open\
\\re break open (v.t.)\
\\de Break open a container, especially a seed pod or an egg\
\\dt 21/Nov/2013\
\
\\lx larlhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge break.open\
\\re break open (v.i.)\
\\de action of a seed pod opening up or an egg hatching\
\
\\lx larnanganj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de cypress pine\
\\sc Callitris intratropica\
\\pde man-larrh\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx larr\
\\pr an-, \'f8\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sandpaper.fig\
\\re sandpaper fig\
\\re fi:Ficus_scobina\
\\re fi:Ficus_opposita\
\\de sandpaper figs\
\\ee Note that the name of this tree sounds very similar to the name of the cypress pine fv:(m)an-larrh, the only difference being that the\
latter has a final glottal stop.\
\\ee The leaves are used as sandpaper finishing on woodwork, such as spear throwers and spears.\
\\sc Ficus scobina, Ficus opposita\
\\sy an-yarrngeyarrnge\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, E, I\
\\ur I= man-yarrngeyarrnge, Kdj= an-bambula\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Larrbba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Jungle vine thicket area on Mann River at Kakodbebuldi. This place is the source of fv:milil vine fi:Trophis_scandens which is used to make the conocal fishtraps known as fv:mandjabu.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx larrbbe\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_seracaflora\
\\de Kind of acacia tree. This tree looks very much like fi:Acacia_holosericea and the two are sometimes referred to by the same name but some speakers have different names for each of them. In Kundjeyhmi both tend to be called fv:an-larrbbe.\
\\sc Acacia seracaflora\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj= an-larrbbe\
\\sn 2\
\\de Spear type with the point being the sharpened end of the shaft; made from fi:Acacia_seracaflora\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 05/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx larrbowkke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de throw down on to the ground with force as if the object is of no value.\
\
\\lx larrh\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cypress.pine\
\\re cypress pine\
\\re fi:Callitris_intratropica\
\\de cypress pine\
\\xv A: Yiman kure an-larrh arri-marnewurlhwurlke arri-yingkihbulebawon. B: Ng ng, ka-yingkibuleyo, ngurri-djalyime\
bonj ka-yingkihbuleyo kuberrk ka-yime marrek an-larrh ka-rung wanjh djal woybukkih ka-buleyo ka-welengkadjung\
kubuyika .\
\\xe A: For example, with cypress pine trees we can burn around them and leave a fire break. B: Mm, the fire break will be there ahead of\
the next fire and the trees will be out in the open [with no fuel around them] and then they will not get burnt, so yeah it's true, the burnt\
area will mean that next fire will move off in another direction.\
\\sc Callitris intratropica\
\\pdn man-larnanganj\
\\ee good building material as the heartwood is termite resistant\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx larrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dry out (of people or things eg. clothes or paint)\
\
\\lx larrhmikurrme\
\\ps v.\
\\de place out in the sun\
\\uv W= dakurrme.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx larrk\
\\ps interj.\
\\de no, nothing\
\\sy kayakki\
\\cf dedjlahlarrk\
\\ce naked\
\
\\lx larrkinje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de singe,cook something in the flames of the fire. This is the first stage of cooking larger mammals with\
fur.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx larrno\
\\va an-larr, man-larr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge flake\
\\re flake of stone from tool making but also a generic term for basic stone cutting tools made from concussive methods.\
\\re stone tool flake\
\\de Stone tool flake (wastage) or can be used as a cutting implement if suitable.\
\\gi incorporable\
\\xv Barri-larrdongi dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe The old people (ancestors) used to strike the rock to make stone cutting tools.\
\\xv Konda barri-di na-kang Marlkawo djarran ba anekke lawk barri-larrngorrkang ka-larryo.\
\\xe They camped here and brought stone blades from [the quarry] at Marlkawo which they carried here and now the flakes are lying around.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 23/Nov/2013\
\
\\lx larruk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Cypress Pine\
\\sc Callitris intratropica\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= man-larrh.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx larrwa\
\\ps n.\
\\re pipe\
\\de Straight pipe for smoking tobacco. Often made from the wood of fi:Canarium_australianum.\
\\bw Macassan or Bajau loan word.\
\\sy badj, djikka\
\
\\lx lawhlawke\
\\ps v. i.\
\\de dance style sometimes known as 'shake-a-leg'.\
\
\\lx lawk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de stone knife, quarried usually from quartz or other hard igneous rock and used for general cutting\
purposes. Also once used for circumcision ceremonies.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lawme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de bite\
\\pde baye\
\\xv Ngan-lawmeng djungdjungh.\
\\pde Duruk ngan-bayeng.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx layirrimiken\
\\va layhlayirrimiken (reduplication)\
\\ps adj.\
\\de striped, having stripes\
\
\\lx lebun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de urinate\
\\va -dilebun\
\\uv Kune dialect = fv:-djorrkoybun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ledjledj\
\\ps n.\
\\de grasshopper\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= djaddedde\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx lekkinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Mangrove Jack\
\\sc Mesopristes cancellatis\
\\ee This salt water fish is not normally caught in Kuninjku territory except occasionally at the end of the\
wet season when the Mangrove Jack make their way up the Mann and Liverpool Rivers.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx leklek\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Opelia_amentacea\
\\de Evergreen scrambling shrub or vigorous woody climber to 10 m high with edible creamy coloured fruit available in fv:kunumeleng. The fruit can also be peeled and leached and applied to sore eyes and other inflammations. Also used to treat skin infections such as scabies.\
\\xv An-leklek an-bang dorrengh.\
\\xe The fi:Opelia_amentacea tree has poison.\
\\ur Kdj= an-binjh\
\\sc Opelia amentacea\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx lerre\
\\ps ideophone\
\\de rattling of snail shell collars placed around dogs.\
\\xv ...duruk birri-kom-dukkang korroko fv:Aboriginal birri-kom-dukkang wanjh ngarlirrk ngalbu yimeng 'lerre lerre lerre'.\
\\xe A long time ago it was Aboriginal way to place collars of snail shells around the necks of dogs and those snail shells would jingle going 'lerre, lerre, lerre'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lerrelerre\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Bossiaea_bossiaeoides\
\\de Holly-leaved pea-flower. A woody shrub sp. with yellow flowers. The prototype is fi:Bossiaea bossiaeoides but the name can also be applied to similar small (to 1.5m) woody fv:man-berrk 'savanna' shrubs. The small yellow flowers are eaten by emus.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Bossiaea bossiaeoides\
\\ee emus eat the fruit/yellow flowers\
\
\\lx lerrlerr\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Bossiaea.bossaeoides\
\\re fi:Bossiaea_bossaeoides\
\\de leafless shrub 1-2m high with yellow pea flowers\
\\xv Ngurrurdu ka-kongun an-lerrlerr.\
\\xe Emus eat the flowers of fi:Bossiaea_bossaeoides\
\\sc Bossiaea bossaeoides\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx lewkme\
\\ps formative in fv:mim-lewkme.\
\
\\lx libke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de slurp up fluid when drinking or eating, especially wild honey.\
\
\\lx libme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de slurp when eating or drinking\
\\xv Dinjhbardkang wanjh bo-rrolkang man-kung. Libkang, libkang, libkang, libkang, libkang,\
"Yim-lobmen yim-lobmen, yim-ray, yim-ray, yim-ray, ba yinganwali yi-libme."\
\\xe He took the stump off the side of the tree and the honey flowed out. He slurped and slurped up the\
honey, "Quick come over here and you have a turn to lick (the honey)."\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx liddahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de sing out 'lidda', a ceremonial call in the Wubarr ceremony called by men in answer to the women who\
call out 'koyhbo, koyhbo, koyhbo'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lidjalidja\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de wind which blows from the south in dry season or build up season\
\\uv I\
\
\\lx lidjke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pinch\
\\xv ngan-lidjkeng\
\\xe he pinched me\
\
\\lx limbidj\
\\ps n.\
\\de term of address for novice in lorrkkon ceremony. A sister will address her brother by this term if she has to at all, after the boy has seen a lorrkkon ceremony.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Lindji\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A tributary creek of the Goomadeer River which has delek (\'91white clay\'92). The quality is not as good as that at Madjanngalkku, but good nonetheless. There is also a campsite. Lindji is around 3km west of the river and 11km southwest of Mamardawerre outstation. \
\\xv Nawu bininj birrimdolkkang kakbibeh / birrini birriborrkkeyi kunred Lindji / wanjh kunekke birrini birriwarreminj (Wildflower Band, Kabbari (A Place Called Kabbari) 2009)\uc0\u8232 \\xe The people from the north came and stayed / They were singing and dancing at the place called Lindji [but at the same time the Rainbow Serpent turned people into rock at Kabbari] / The Rainbow Serpent went to Lindji and turned them into rock as well (Wildflower Band, Kabbari (A Place Called Kabbari) 2009)\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx linjbilinjbi\
\\ph rlinjbirlinjbi (NE)\
\\ps n.\
\\de name for a publically displayed design painted on the bodies of Lorrkkon and Kunabibi initiates after the ceremony has finished. The design consists of long parallel lines painted over the torso in red ochre.\
\\xv Linjbilinjbi karri-djarrberlke.\
\\pde Linjbilinjbi karri-kurrme.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx lirrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.articulate\
\\re articulate perfectly\
\\de articulate perfectly a song, speech or language\
\\uv I\
\
\\lx lirrhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de scratch\
\\xv Nga-yayme, kan-bodmelirrhmen!\
\\xe I'm itchy, scratch my back!\
\
\\lx lirrk\
\\va lirrk-kurrmeng\
\\ps n.\
\\de the first crescent after a new moon\
\
\\lx lirrk-djarrbelkerren\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de new moon\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx lirrk-kurrmeng\
\\ps n.\
\\de new moon\
\\pdn kk = lirrk-djarrbelkerren.\
\
\\lx lirrk-moname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place bones\
\
\\lx lobme \
\\va rlobme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1.\
\\de run, move quickly\
\\xv Ngam-lobme murrikang mang ngudberre.\
\\xe I'll come in the truck and pick you all up.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge function\
\\re function\
\\de function, operate\
\\xv Kunburrkken ka-rolbme.\
\\xe The functioning of the body.\
\\pdn kk = kurlkurlme\
\
\\lx lobmelobme\
\\va rlobmerlobme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de many SUBJ. running or moving quickly.\
\\xv Darwin man-wern murrikang ka-rlobmerlobme.\
\\xe In Darwin there are many cars running around.\
\
\\lx lod\
\\va lodno\
\\sn 1\
\\ps n. incorp.\
\\ge round.thing\
\\re round object, cylindrical/oblong thing\
\\re cylindrical/oblong thing, round object\
\\de Round object, cylindrical/oblong thing.\
\\gi An incorporable noun, shape classifier.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge loaf\
\\re loaf\
\\de Loaf; used to describe round shapes such as damper/bread loaves, human torsos or yams.\
\\xv Na-lodkimuk.\
\\xe Fat man.\
\\xv Yi-lodbakkemen.\
\\xe Break the loaf (of damper).\
\\ng Incorporable.\
\\dt 13/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx lohlorrk\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps loc\
\\de inside empty logs\
\\xv Djaddjarr ku-kurlbbinj mak ku-lohlorrk ka-yo.\
\\xe Djaddjarr lives inside termite mounds and empty logs.\
\
\\lx lohlorrkken\
\\ps n.\
\\pr kun-\
\\de name used by Kunwinjku speakers for the eastern dialect Kuninjku spoken in Mann and Liverpool\
Rivers district.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx loklok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de A generic term for smaller skinks.\
\\sc Carlia amax, Cryptoblepharus plagiocephalus, Ctenotus inornatus, Sphenomorphus douglasi, Morethia storri\
\\cf see fv:burndjingh\
\\nt Check against other small lizard names.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lolowhke\
\\ps v.t\
\\de strip bark off a tree\
\\uv E [check, lolohke, lolowkke?]\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx lombeng\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Astromyrtuis symphyocarpa (formerly Melaleuca symphyocarpa).\
\\ee Grows in lowland wetlands in heavy black loamy soils\
\\uv I\
\\uv Djnj= anlombeng\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx lombeng\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Asteromyrtus.symphyocarpa\
\\re fi:Asteromyrtus_symphyocarpa\
\\de kind of multi-stemmed tree 4-10m high (previously classified as a Melaleuca), the flowers of which are a\
source of nectar for honey bees.\
\\xv An-lombeng an-kung ka-rrahkendong.\
\\xe The an-lombeng tree fills up the honey hives.\
\\sc Asteromyrtus symphyocarpa\
\\uv Djnj= an-lombeng, I= man-lombeng\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx lorlbban\
\\ps n.\
\\ge honey.bee.sp.\
\\re honey bee sp.\
\\de Bee species and their honey, found in tree trunks and has a short 'nose' entrance tube.\
\\xv Lorlbban, nakka djal nungan kodjyahyawno. Kurrulk karri-ngalke darnki kure kuwarddewardde.\
\\xe Lorlbban, those bees have small heads. We find them [the hives] in the trees close to rock country.\
\\pdn kk= ngaldjingbornko\
\\sd bees&honey\
\
\\lx lorlbban-lorlbban\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Micraira.sp.\
\\re fi:Micraira_sp.\
\\de kind of short shrub with flowers that bees of the fv:lorlbban hive type use to make honey\
\\xv An-lorlbbanlorlbban bodno ka-nan ka-warrengmarren 'warreng ngarduk, warreng ngarduk, makka warreng ngarduk' ka-benkaybun kaban-darhme.\
\\xe The fv:lorlbba> honey bees see the fi:Micraira.sp. shrub and curse it to stop other bees coming near it (and taking the nectar), they say\
'curse you, this is mine, curse you this is mine', and they refuse to share it with anyone.\
\\sy lorlbban ka-warrengmarren\
\\sc Micraira spiciforma Lazarides \
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx lorlme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de hit one object against another, crash against something\
\\sn 2\
\\de pound\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde -dong\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Lorlo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djordi (check) clan estate. This is the site of the greedy emu bird ancestor story.\
\
\\lx lorrhmiyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sleep lightly, half asleep\
\
\\lx lorrk-bebke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de eject an empty round or cartridge out of a firearm.\
\
\\lx lorrkkon\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de bone pole coffin,\
\\sn 2\
\\de bone pole mortuary ceremony\
\\ee Burarra fv:larrkan.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx lorrkno\
\\ps adj.\
\\de empty\
\
\\lx lowkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de peel off bark or a strip of wood from a tree, especially fv:Eucalyptus tetrodonta.\
\\xv Yikabeh burluddak arri-kornmang arri-djedme arri-lowkmang.\
\\xe Sometimes we get it [wood for spear throweers] from Eucalyptus tetrodonta and we peel off a strip of\
timber and carve the spear-thrower handle.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Lukkanaya\
\\ps prop. n.r\
\\sd mythology\
\\de One of the two fv:yawkyawk sisters who are creation dreaming ancestors for people in fv:na-Dankorlo\
clan. The other sister is fv:Marraykka.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lulumi\
\\pr an-\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge arc\
\\re fern-leaved grevillea\
\\de formative in fv:an-dadjek_an-lulumi, 'a fern-leaved grevillea which has curved over and fallen down in a large arc'.\
\\sd plant\
\\so LBN\
\\sc Grevillea pteridifolia\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx lumaluma\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mythological being associated with fv:mardayin ceremony\
\
\\lx lumbuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bronze.wing.pigeon\
\\re common bronzewing pigeon\
\\re bronzewing pigeon\
\\re fi: Phaps_chalcoptera\
\\de Common bronzewing pigeon.\
\\sc Phaps chalcoptera\
\\xv Lumbuk ka-ngun man-kurddu.\
\\xe Bronzewing pigeon eats fi:Elaeocarpus_arnhemicus fruit.\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lundji\
\\va lundja\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de evil spirit which takes the form of a kangaroo or buffalo.\
\\xv Lundji namarnde kan-bun ka-marnburren nganabbarru la kunj ka-yo kure mingarre.\
\\xe Lundji is a demon who can attack us, and can turn itself into a buffalo or a kangaroo which lives in the\
vine thickets.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lurdme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de run at full speed\
\\xv Nakkan mimih ka-lurdme barri-bimbom.\
\\xe They painted a mimih running.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx lurdme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de walk off, go off\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx lurlbba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de raptor name?\
\\sc ?\
\
\\lx lurlbbun\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps pred\
\\de bulging, eg. a joey in a pouch\
\\nt check part of speech.\
\
\\lx lurlhlurlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hop (certain macropod species specific only), pertains to both male and female agile wallaby\
(Macropus agilis) only.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx lurlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swell up\
\
\\lx lurlurlhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de dig out something, poke out, extract a substance with a tool eg. white clay with a digging stick.\
\\xe Nakka yi-ngalkeng ma birrang yi-lurlurlhmen.\
\\xv You've found some OK dig it out with the machete.\
\
\\lx lurlurlmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swell up, expand\
\
\\lx lurribme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de dig\
\\pde karung\
\\xv Kun-budjub karri-modme karri-lurribme man-karremudyi.\
\\pde Kun-kanin karri-mang karri-karung karrbarda.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ma\
\\va mah\
\\ps interj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge time.to.act\
\\re interjection, 'time to act'\
\\de 'time to act', 'let it happen'\
\\xv A: Nga-karonhmeng nga-worhnang wanjh \'93bolkki ngani-djalrung\'94, nga-yimeng wurdyaw nahni. B: Ma!\
\\xe A: I turned around and watched [the bushfire] and said to this child here "we are going to get burnt! B: Go on! [what happened next]\
\\xv Wardi ngurri-na, ka-borrkke ma, ma!\
\\xe Hey you all have a look, he's going to dance, here he goes, here he goes!\
\\sn 2\
\\ge OK\
\\re OK, alright\
\\de OK, alright, a confirmation of or agreement with a proposition\
\\xv A: La ngunem-re? B: Yo wolewoleh nganem-re. A: Ma!\
\\xe A: Are you two coming? B: Yes, we'll come in the afternoon. A: OK then.\
\\dt 27/Jan/2012\
\
\\lx Mabangkam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Next billabong north of Kakodbebuldi. Good spot for hunting geese, ducks, pigs and wallabies.\
na-Danglorlo clan estate.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mabangkarak\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de A hill above the eastern bank of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek, directly (around 50 metres) north of the camp at Kolobarr Kabokbok. It is directly north of the confluence of Birraduk Creek and Dordo. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Mabara\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place south of Mumeka in Djok clan estate on Liverpool River.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mabarrabbarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bar-shouldered.dove\
\\re bar-shouldered dove\
\\re fi:Geopelia_humeralis\
\\de Bar-shouldered dove.\
\\sc Geopelia humeralis\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mabbabburr\
\\ps n\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de raft made from Melaleuca bark.\
\\uv W, sometimes used by I.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mabbabburr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de large Melaleuca species\
\\uv W (but some people from fv:Marrkolidjban use this word).\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mabbarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge paperbark.spp.\
\\re paperbark spp.\
\\de Generic term for various broad leaved paperbarks (small specimens only) and blue-leaved paperbark.\
\\ee fv:mabbarr also applies to a variety of fi:Melaleuca_viridiflora which is smaller as it tends to grow in dense stands in poorly drained areas. The larger trees may have different names. Many names for paperbarks cut across scientific classifications and are based more on tree hight, leaf characteristics and habitat.\
\\xv Mabbarr worryahwurd.\
\\xe fv:Mabbarr paperbarks have small leaves.\
\\xv Mabbarr kabbal ka-rri.\
\\xe fv:Mabbarr paperbarks grows on the plain country/flats.\
\\sc Melaleuca viridiflora, Melaleuca dealbata, Melaleuca nervosa\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 19/Jun/2013\
\\sy man-djirdda\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx mabbun\
\\ps n. insect\
\\de case moth\
\\ee duwa.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mabikarri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Salmon sp., saltwater fish.\
\\sc check.\
\
\\lx Mabirna\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in the Tin Camp Creek region\
\\de An area of savanna with low hills and the occasional scattered rock, on a high plain in the headwaters of Tin Camp Creek. A kilometre or so to the east is rough rocky plateau. The area is about 30km southwest of Mamardawerre.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Mabirrkkul\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Patch of open square shaped plain country in the Maburrinj estate, around 10km east of the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 and \'91Goomadeer\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River.  A (m)anyawko djang (Eucalyptus tectifica Dreaming) is located here. Eucalyptus tectifica flowers in the first rains and wet season times.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Mabordeknguk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx mabu\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge black.ochre\
\\re black ochre\
\\de Black ochre.\
\\xv Ngale ngal-bengwarr ngalu kurdukadji. All kind, kun-mabu warridj ka-ngun.\
\\xe The emu, she\'92s crazy. She\'92s all kind of things, even charcoal.\
\\uv I\
\\dt 24/Nov/2013\
\
\\lx Maburrinj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Estate name in the upper Goomadeer River region.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx mad\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de ankle\
\
\\lx madbarnno\
\\va kun-madbarn\
\\ge heel pad\
\\re heel pad\
\\de Heel pad especially of macropods.\
\\xv Ka-warddemelme njamed bokbobowk wanjh borok borok ka-madwokdi, dengeno, madbarnno, borok borok borok ba-yimeng.\
\\xe It [the black wallaroo] makes a noise when hopping on rock [represented by the song words] 'bokbobowk', the heel pads of its feet make a sound as it hops 'borok borok borok' is how it would go.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx madbun\
\\ps v.\
\\de wait\
\
\\lx madburndedj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va madburndedjno\
\\ps n.\
\\de heel of foot\
\\sy kun-dengeburndedj\
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx Maddalk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan on the upper East Alligator River region\
\\xv Manih yi-nan ka-bore Ngalngordbudjum. Man-kabo ka-wanjdjadduluburren, Kukalangak, kaddum kure na-Maddalk\
kunred. Kaddum man-wanjdjad Maddalk Karlbakarridjam, Kalawan Kamik, Worrkorl kilhken.\
\\xe You see this [creek] it goes to Ngalngordbudjum. The confluence of this creek [with the river] is at Kukalangak and upstream from\
there it is Maddalk clan country. Following that creek upstream are the Maddalk clan sites of Karlbakarridjam, Kalawan Kamik, and\
the Worrkorl clan land is downstream.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so Bardayal Nadjamerrek\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx maddjurn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge black-headed.python\
\\re black-headed python\
\\re fi:Aspidites_melanocephalus\
\\de Black-headed python\
\\sc Aspidites melanocephalus\
\\uv W, I, Djnj\
\\sy djurn (I)\
\\pdn kk = ngaldjangarakurlngunj\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\
\\lx madngukderren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de defaecate all over one's own ankles as a result of eating too much.\
\\pdn Obviously not in polite usage. May be used in fv:kun-kurrng joking relationship language or as a\
vulgar insult.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx madwokdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge heel.make.noise\
\\re heel make noise\
\\de Sound of a foot on the ground or the noise made by the feet of macropods as they jump.\
\\xv Ka-warddemelme njamed bokbobowk wanjh borok borok ka-madwokdi, dengeno, madbarnno, borok borok borok ba-yimeng.\
\\xe It [the black wallaroo] makes a noise when hopping on rock [represented by the song words] 'bokbobowk', the heel pads of its feet make a sound as it hops 'borok borok borok' is how it would go.\
\
\\lx madj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de octopus\
\
\\lx madj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de generic term for bags and containers of all kinds, also bedding and other personal possessions. Often used also to refer to large pandanus fibre baskets.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Madja\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de name of one of the creation ancestors (bininj nayuhyungki).\
\
\\lx madjalkbadj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re fi:Typhonium_sp.\
\\re Arum plant\
\\de kind of herbaceous plant of the Arum family (as are fi:Amorphophallus_spp.) with a subterranean tuber which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is rendered edible.\
\\ee There is considerable variation in shape and size of Arum plants and as a result, the various dialects of Bininj Kunwok have various\
names for the different sizes of the same species. Variation may also be classified in terms of moiety opposition. See e.g. fv:walangari,\
fv:djedbarlh\
\\sc Typhonium_sp.\
\\sy (m)an-djanek, (m)an-danek, kubulurr\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx madjandemed\
\\ps. n.\
\\ge lizard.sp.\
\\re Gilbert's dragon\
\\re tata lizard\
\\re bobo lizard\
\\re fi:Lophognathus_gilberti\
\\de Gilbert's dragon (named after Ludwig Leichhardt's exploration companion John Gilbert), also known as the 'tata lizard' or 'bobo lizard', so named because of the lizard's habit of waving its hand. Note that increasingly, younger people are using the name fv:madjandemed in a more general sense to also refer to fi:Diporiphora species (various lined-dragons).\
\\xv Morruyhmorruyh ngudjbang ka-lobme, madjandemed ngudjwarre ka-re.\
\\xe The ring-tailed dragon runs swiftly but Gilbert's dragon is much slower when it moves.\
\\sc Lophognathus gilberti, Diporiphora spp.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\
\\lx Madjanik\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place probably in the upper reaches of Birraduk [Birrirddak] Creek\
\\xv Larrk, nakka weleng Madjanik karrkad nakka kuberrk. Manekke Madjanik kam-kolung Nabarlek beh... Kudjumarndi. Mani wanjh ngalengman manu Kundanjmulu an-kabo Kunmayimbuk man-kabo.\uc0\u8232 \\xe No, this way then you come out at Madjanik, out of the gorge. You come down there from Nabarlek... Kudjumarndi. Then there is Kundanjmulu and the creek that goes to Kunmayimbuk.\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Madjanngalkku\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Famed delek \'91white clay\'92 site on a small creek in the Maburrinj estate. The site is just east of an elbow in the Goomadeer River where it makes a sharp right-angle turn to the north following the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches. The delek found here is huntite and of a very pure grade. The huntite nodules within the earth can be picked up off the surface, especially in the early to mid dry after the wet season flow has exposed new deposits. It is in both the creek bed and in the creek banks. The delek is highly sought after by artists as it is a brilliant white and available in large quantities. The site is considered a traditional mine, and is of considerable cultural significance as well as commercial value to the people of the area. The site is considered a traditional mine.\
\\xv Madjanngalkku-beh Yidakdak-beh kawanjdjadduluburren kure Djabulu.\
\\xe From Madjanngalkku and Yidakdak (downstream) there is a confluence of small tributaries at Djabulu (upstream).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx madjanghno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge first_course\
\\de the offal of game (for example, kangaroo, magpie goose, emu) roasted on the coals of a fire and eaten as the 'first course' or entree.\
\\re entree meal\
\\re first course (meal)\
\\uv E, I, Djnj\
\\pl madjamadjanghno\
\\uv W= man-modjangh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Madjawarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of two fi:duwa moiety patriclans, one in the upper Goomadeer [Kumadderr] River region and the other in the Nabarlek and\
Nimbuwa region of western Arnhem Land\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx madjawarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\ge kind of cane-grass\
\\re grass, fi:Phragmites_karka\
\\sn 1\
\\de kind of grass used for making spear shafts\
\\sn 2\
\\de spear made from cane-grass used for hunting fish or geese\
\\xv Madjawarr yi-dadjdjemen yi-marnbu man-kole.\
\\xe Cut that cane grass and make a spear.\
\\sc Phragmites karka\
\\dt 22/May/2007\
\
\\lx Madjba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan \
\\xv An-bolh ngarri-bunjyidurndengi, arri-dadjkeyi arri-kolemirndemey, Marranboy. Ngarri-djohdjorrngmi Djulnuk o maitbi ngamed, barri-djorrngmi, an-kole arri-djorrngmi Wurlbbum. Ngale mak nga-kordidjmerren kumekke, ngalekke mak berlbarli ngadburrung Madjba kumekke ka-ngeyyo [laughter]. Ya, nga-bolkdarrame ke.\
\\xe We'd follow the route back, carrying the bundles of bamboo spear shafts having cut large numbers of them coming from Marranboy. We'd straighten out the shafts at Djulnuk or maybe whatsit, we'd straighten them out at Wurlbbum. I've just sworn at myself because my sister of the Madjba clan has the same name as that place [laughs]. Yes, I'm referring to her for you by saying the name of that\
place.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx madjbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de hit or damage somebody's swag or posessions.\
\
\\lx Madjdjalum\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan on the eastern Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Ngadberre, ka-djalkadjurren raworrinj Warihngu Wurrbbarn djal raworrinj. Yiman na-Djordi djalraworrinj\
na-Madjdjalum raworrinj. \
\\xe It\'92s ours, the Waridjngu and Wurrbbarn grouped together to share everything. Just like the Djordi and Madjdjalum join together.\
\\ee This clan is extinct. Bangardi Jacky Namadakalkal who lived at Madjinbardi was the last member of the Madjdjalum clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx madjdjul\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de outer strips of bark from the stringybark tree, fv:anburluddak, 'Eucalyptus tetrodonta'\
\\sy ankong\
\
\\lx Madjekel\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re esate name\
\\de Estate name or fv:kun-ngeykimuk.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx madjenge\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n. kun-derbi kin term. Eg. My fv:kakkak, your fv:kangkin, you are my son/daughter, I am your\
mother.\
\\cn na-madjewurd/ngal-madjewurd.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx madjewurd\
\\pr na-/ngal-\
\\ps n. kun-derbi term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg.,my nephew/niece, your fv:kakkak, you are my uncle.\
\\cn na-madjenge /ngal-madjenge.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx madjird-madjird\
\\ps n.\
\\re blue-faced honey-eater\
\\de Blue-faced honeyeater.\
\\sc Entomyzon cyanotis\
\\uv I\
\\sd birds\
\
\\lx madjirnh-madjirnh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 1\
\\de white-bellied cuckoo shrike 2. fairy martin\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx madj-kirhwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de wet possessions, bedding or clothing.\
\
\\lx mahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge agree.to.go\
\\re agree to go\
\\de agree to go somewhere, give assent to a travel proposal\
\\xe Ngudda yiddok yi-mahmeng mayh bu yi-re?\
\\ee Have you agreed to go the ceremony?\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I= -daybun\
\\dt 15/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mak\
\\ps adj.\
\\de good\
\\xv ngal-kebmak\
\\xe attractive woman\
\\xv man-manjmak\
\\xe good tasting food\
\\xv Ngurri-mak? Yo, ngarri-mak.\
\\xe Is everyone OK? Yes, we're fine.\
\\xv Ka-mak?\
\\xe Is everything OK?\
\\pdn kk = kamarlang\
\\xv Na-mak nakkan.\
\\xe He's a good man.\
\
\\lx mak\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de goodness\
\
\\lx mak\
\\lc na-mak\
\\ps n.\
\\de a good man\
\
\\lx mak\
\\pr ngal-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge good.woman\
\\re good woman\
\\de 'a good woman'\
\
\\lx makali\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mud cod\
\\re mud cod\
\\re northern mud cod\
\\re fi:Ophiocara_porocephala\
\\re mud cod\
\\de Northern mud cod, also known as spangled gudgeon.\
\\sc Ophiocara porocephala\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Makani\
\\va Makarni\
\\ps n. prop.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de An estate name that includes country around Nimbuwa rock and further to the west in the Nabarlek region terminating west around Birrirddak Creek.\
\\sd placename\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 07/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx makburren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de come, arrive?? check\
\\uv Kune\
\
\\lx makih\
\\ps conj.\
\\de sequential organiser, '.... and then'\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sy wanjh.\
\
\\lx Makilirrinj \
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place name in Birrirddak Creek region.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx makirrarra\
\\ps n.\
\\de crepuscular rays (i.e. beams of sunlight during sunset)\
\\dv Kun-dung ka-yibme ka-wayalhme.\
\\xv Makirrarra ka-kuk-djowkdjowkke yok.\
\\xe The bandicoot crosses over on the rays of the setting sun.\
\\ee According to Kuninjku mythology, the ancestral bandicoot-being travels along the crepuscular rays.\
\
\\lx makka ngarduk\
\\va ngarduk makka\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, my wife your fv:kakkak, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn makkawarre\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx makkakkurr\
\\ps n.\
\\re pelican\
\\re fi:Pelecanus_conspicillatus\
\\de Pelican\
\\sc Pelecanus conspicillatus\
\\uv I \
\\ur I= werne\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Makkalarl\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de An important camping place in the Djalbangurrk estate in the upper reaches of the Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer). There is a billabong here with surrounding plains. Makkalarl is almost 60km south of where the Goomadeer crosses the Gunbalanya-Maningrida road, but only about 20km northwest of Kabulwarnamyo outstation. Two creeks form a confluence around 12km upstream of where the Gumardir drops down from the escarpment south of its confluence with the Goomadeer, and Makkalarl is on the eastern branch. Makkalaral is still sometimes visited, mostly as part of activities organised out Kabulwarnamyo outstation. About 2 kilometres south of Makkalarl are the important rock art sites of Kunberrkken.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx makkawarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term; eg., 1.my fv:kakkak, your wife, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.The reciprocal\
would then be fv:makka ngarduk\}. 2.Another example is speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka,\
speaker calls referent sister, hearer calls referent fv:makka.\
\\cn ngarduk makka\
\\sn 3\
\\de My mother's father, your husband, we call each other fv:kakkak.\
\\cn mamamh.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx makka1\
\\ps n.\
\\de kun-derbi term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent same sex sibling,\
hearer calls referent fv:makka\
\\ee Eg. Djarningbul to Kurawalwal about Kardildil, (Bulanj to Kalidjan about Bulanj).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx makka2\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de FM, FMB\
\
\\lx makka\
\\va makkah, makkan\
\\ps dem.\
\\de that, it\
\
\\lx Makkebowan\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Estate name or fv:kun-ngeykimuk in the upper Mann River region.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Makkirdin\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kulmarru clan estate on the bank of the Mann River.\
\
\\lx makkulurr\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge tree sp.\
\\re Terminalia sericocarpa\
\\de kind of Terminalia tree, 15-30m high with dense layered branches\
\\ee common in the Kalara Birridjowkkeng (border store) area\
\\sd plant\
\\so LBN\
\\sc Terminalia sericocarpa\
\\bb Brock 2001: 317\
\\p see iPhoto entry Terminalia sericocarpa\
\\sn 2\
\\ge tree sp.\
\\re Maranthes corymbosa\
\\de kind of large tree 10-25m\
\\sd plant\
\\so LBN\
\\sc Maranthes corymbosa\
\\bb Brock 2001: 249\
\\dt 23/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx makkumbu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de wind which blows in the late wet season and knocks down the spear grass, 'knockem downs'.\
\\ee Iwaidja = makumbu\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx makmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de recover, get better\
\
\\lx mako\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge didjeridu\
\\re didjeridu\
\\de Didjeridu.\
\\xv Ma mako yi-buhmen!\
\\xe OK, play the didjeridu!\
\\sn 2\
\\ge rifle\
\\re rifle, shotgun\
\\re shotgun, rifle\
\\sd material culture\
\\pdn kk= djalubu\
\\syn morle (rare)\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx makolkol\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of hibiscus plant\
\\sc Hibiscus meraukensis\
\
\\lx Makorl\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Name of an estate or fv:kun-ngeykimuk.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Makulmayo\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place name in Birrirddak Creek region.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx mala\
\\pr man-\
\\sd plant\
\\ps n.\
\\dv Kun-djalh karri-bakke yiman karri-wahwahme.\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx mala-\
\\ps t.adv.\
\\de early morning, used as a prefix on verbs\
\
\\lx malabakke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de break off a branch of a plant to use as camouflage.\
\\sy malabun\
\
\\lx malabbanjdja\
\\va alabbanjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Grewia.spp.\
\\re fi:Grewia_xanthopetala\
\\re fi:Grewia_multiflora\
\\de Kind of shrub.\
\\sc Grewia xanthopetala, Grewia multiflora\
\\ee Both good for firesticks (fire drills). The bark strips of both species can be rolled\
into string.\
\\sn 2\
\\re fi:Hibiscus_tiliaceus\
\\de Kind of hibiscus. As for the fi:Grewia species, the bark of this hibiscus is used to make string and the young stems are good firesticks.\
\\ur Maung, Iwaidja, Amurdak= alabanjdja\
\\sc Hibiscus tiliaceaus\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 15/Jul/2008\
\
\\lx malaboknan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de find or look at fresh animal tracks in the early morning, eg. from a buffalo which passed by in the\
night.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx malabun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de break off a branch of a plant to use as camouflage.\
\\sy mala-bakke\
\
\\lx maladulubun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de shoot something early in the morning, go hunting early.\
\
\\lx maladjangkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go hunting early in the morning.\
\
\\lx malakaberrkdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stand out in the open in the morning (usually refers to the early feeding of kangaroos in open grassed\
areas).\
\\xv Kunj kabirri-mala-kaberrkdi.\
\\xe The kangaroos come out in the open early in the morning.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx malakaka\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.mimula\
\\re fi:Acacia_mimula\
\\de kind of acacia tree with flowers of creamy globular heads (in May) and very rough highly fissured dark brown to black bark.\
\\sc Acacia mimula\
\\ee There is frequent misidentification and confusion between fi:Acacia_platycarpa and fi:Acacia_mimula because of the similarity in the flowers, fruit and habitat. Brock (2001) describes the main differences in the size (especially width) of the leaves, time of flowering and the texture of the bark. fi:Acacia_platycarpa is described as having 'bark: rough and grey to brown on trunk, smooth and whitish on upper branches' and 'phyllodes: alternate, smooth to slightly coarse, stiff, broad, curved, upper margin strongly curved and often wavy, blade 11-16cm x 3-6cm, dull grey-green, 3-4 prominent raised longitudinal veins joining towards base, rounded tip.' (Brock 2001:71). fi:Acacia_mimula on the other hand is described as 'bark:rough, grey, fibrous to tessellated' and 'pyllodes: smooth, elongated, curved to\
sickle-shaped, widest at middle, blade 8-15 cm x 1-3cm, dull green with 2-3 prominent longitudinal veins. fi:Acacia_platycarpa flowers from November to July whilst fi:Acacia_mimula only from April to June (Brock 2001:68).\
\\sy an-djarrarn\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-djarrarn\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx malakakdong\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Get up early in the morning, rise at dawn.\
\\xv Birri-yimi korroko nani nawu nakohbanj Wamud ka-bengkan morrdjdjanjno. Bu ka-djare ka-morrddjanjkadjung. Birri-malakakdoy birri-nayi kamaladjamdi birri-yameninj man-kole birri-kukyikolinj birri-kinjemeninj. \
\\xe They used to do this a long time ago as did old man Wamud and the early morning hunting songs. If he wants, he can sing those songs. They would get up before dawn and would see one [a black wallaroo] sitting there and they would spear it and come back down to camp to cook it.\
\\dt 11/May/2015\
\
\\lx malakan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de carry branches as camouflage\
\
\\lx Malakirri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a (Amurdak language?) patriclan in the region of Mt Borrodaile, Awunbarna.\
\\ee This clan is now extinct.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx malambibbi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bat.spp.\
\\re bat spp.\
\\re fi:Hipposideros_diadema\
\\re fi:Rhinonicteris_aurantius\
\\de Small insect-eating bats of various species such as the diadem horseshoe bat and the orange horseshoe bat. Other species may be included but more research is needed to determine this.\
\\sc Hipposideros diadema, Rhinonicteris aurantius\
\\sd mammals\
\\dt 26/Nov/2013\
\
\\lx malamlam\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de grove of dense but thin tall dry-land trees especially Eucalypts.\
\
\\lx malanjdirrihdirri\
\\lc ngal-malanjdirrihdirri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de an old female mimi spirit. She is not the same as ordinary mimi spirits. She is of Duwa moiety whereas other mimi spirits such as those carved by Kuningbal, Kurddal and Yalandja are said to be Yirridjdja.\
Ngal-malanjdirrihdirri is old and frail. She is of mischievous character and is said to appear before people travelling in the bush. She points in a particular direction in order to confuse people so that she becomes lost. Also she is said to reside in a grove of sand palms (Livistonia humilis) with the special name man-marrabbi. This is in the area just 'above' (fv:karrkad) Barrihdjowkkeng in kun-Darnkorlo. Ngal-malanjdirrihdirri is closely associated with fv:yawkyawk or female water spirits. She is said to be\
their "boss".\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx malarnba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de unidentified vine with yellow fruit.\
\
\\lx malarrk\
\\va malamalarrk\
\\de term the Kuninjku use to describe those from the east, the Yolngu or those who use the term 'mala' to describe clan groupings. "Sunrise mob."\
\\xv Nungka Malarrk ka-wokdi.\
\\xe He speaks Yolngu language.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx malaworr\
\\lc kun-malaworr\
\\de n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de leafy branches\
\\pdn kk = kun-worred.\
\
\\lx malayi\
\\va malaywi\
\\ps time adv.\
\\ng incorporable or free standing, but can also be reduced to fv:mala as an incorporable adverb\
\\sn 1\
\\ge tomorrow\
\\re tomorrow\
\\de tomorrow\
\\xv Bolkki kakkawarr ka-bebme malayi ka-kodjrung wanjh bonj karri-yalarrme.\
\\xe Today the ceremonial messenger arrives, tomorrow the ceremonial feast will cook and then we all go our seperate ways.\
\\xv Malayibuyika.\
\\xe The day after tomorrow, in a number of days.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge morning\
\\re morning\
\\xv Ngudda yi-malayibonguneng?\
\\xe Did you drink it this morning?\
\\sn 3\
\\ge next.day\
\\re next day, the following day\
\\de the next day, the following day\
\\cf malahmalayi\
\\ce morning, the next day\
\\xv Namarnde ka-ni kumekke. Yi-kayhme wolewoleh malahmalayi... wanjh kumekke kun-wardde ka-yime 'ooooooo'\
kayhmeng wanjh. \
\\xe There is a spirit being there. You call out in the afternoon or morning,... and the rock will then sing out 'ooooooo'. \
\\xv Mirurr arri-yoy wanjh malahmalayi Ngalurdbirrhmi arri-yoy. \
\\xe We camped at Mirurr and then the next day we went to Ngalurdbirrhmi and camped there.\
\\cf malayibebme\
\\ce arrive the following day, arrive in the morning\
\\xv Kolorrhyi arri-bebme la Kamarrkawarn wanjh arri-kadjung ngarri-yongen ku-wardde maitbi o kun-kanalanj\
malamalayi ngarri-malayibebme Kamarrkawarn.\
\\xe We'll arrive at Kolorrhyi and follow the route to Kamarrkawarn and we will camp perhaps in the rocks or in the sand and the next\
morning, we'll arrive at Kamarrkawarn in the morning.\
\\pdn kk = milbabba\
\\uv I, E= malayi, W, Kdj= malaywi, I, E synonym= ngulam, ngulanyak\
\\dt 26/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx malel\
\\pr kun-, ku-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Joke, jocular talk, fun, not serious.\
\\xv \'93\cf2 Yuwn yi-djekme minj kumalel dja woybukkih\'94 wanjh birri-dokmeng kured.\
\\xe Don\'92t laugh, this is not a joke but it\'92s true\'94,  and so they then went home.\
\\se malehmalel\
\\de Amusement, non-serious activity, fun, mucking around.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\xv That only nothing malehmalel wanjkih nakka worrkdawh bolkkime djadjihme, berlyak kodjyak. \
\\xe That\'92s nothing serious that painting, just like a bit off mucking around, it\'92s a truncated torso, no arms or head.\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\id DK, MG (malehmalel, xv)\
\\dt 02/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx malelmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re tease, joke with\
\\re joke with someone\
\\de Joke with someone, tease, make fun of, not take seriously.
\fs28 \

\fs32 \\xv Bininj bedda birrihmalelmangi namekke wurdyaw.\
\\xe Those people were teasing that little boy. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 30\
\\se malelmarren\
\\de Tease each other, joke with each other, engage each other in joking relationship humour.\
\\xv \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Yoh kakkak, kakkak kabeneh-malelmarren nawu.\
\\xe Yes, grandkin, the grandkin are always joking with each other [i.e. a man and his sister\'92s daughter\'92s children or a woman and her daughter\'92s children].\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\xv Kun-buyika nga-nang bolkki, bu birri-bebmeng mayh dorrengh wanjh birri-wern birri-djurrkwong rowk birri-karrmeng mayh birri-malelmarrinj birri-njilngmakminj.\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  \
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\xe The other thing that I notice today is how close and personal people got to the [dead] emu, with everyone excited holding on to it and joking with each to make everyone feel happy again.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \\id DK\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\dt 14/Jul/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx malerrweb\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Aeschynomene.aspera\
\\re fi:Aeschynomene_aspera\
\\de Shrub sp. that grows in thickets on floodplains. Said to have alternating annual growth levels\'97 one year it grows tall, the next year it is short.\
\\sc Aeschynomene aspera\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Sesbania.sp.\
\\re fi:Sesbania_cannabina\
\\de annual shrub 1\'963 m high; young stems and leaves with spreading hairs\
\\sc Sesbania cannabina\
\\ee 'Good light fuel for starting fire.'\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 15/Nov/2011\
\
\\lx malimalidj\
\\ps n. insects\
\\de praying mantis\
\\sc Tenodera australasiae\
\
\\lx malk\
\\va malkno\
\\ps n.\
\\re season, weather\
\\de Season, weather, time of year.\
\\se malkborledme\
\\de change of season, change of weather\
\\se malkbulerran\
\\de time when country becomes black from fire in the dry season\
\\se malkyimerran\
\\de change in weather, change in season\
\\dt 16/Jun/2016\
\
\\lx malk\
\\ps n.\
\\re kinship category, subsection\
\\re subsection\
\\re skin name\
\\de Skin name, subsection, marriage class.\
\\xv Njale malkno ke?\
\\xe What is your skin name?\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs34 \cf0 \\lx malkbiyukeyi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Early morning before the first light, still dark.\
\\xv Korroko dabborrabolk bu birrimorrdjdjanjnokadjungi birridolkkani djarre bu malkbiyukeyi.\
\\xe A long time ago, the old people would get up very early in the morning to sing the morrdjdjanjno hunting songs when it was still dark.
\fs32 \
\
\\lx malkdjakarlno\
\\lc kun-malkdjakarlno\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de liver\
\\pde kun-malk.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx malng\
\\lc kun-malng\
\\va malngno\
\\ps n.\
\\de clan spirit which returns to a deceased's country after death\
\
\\lx Malworn\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\de place in Djalama clan estate with an outstation and airstrip\
\
\\lx mamam\
\\va mamamh (voc.)\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de MFZ,MF,DD,DS\
\
\\lx mamamh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my husband, your fv:mamamh ie. mother's father. We call each other\
fv:kakkak.\
\\cn makkawarre.\
\\sn 2\
\\de My cousin ie. fv:na-kurrng, your fv:kanjok, you are my nephew.\
\\cn mamamh ngarduk.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mamamh ngarduk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my spouse's cross sex sibling, your cousin fv:na-kurrng/ngal-kurrng, you are\
my uncle\
\\cn mamamh.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Mamardawerre\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\re placename\
\\de Oustation community in the Goomadderr River region. Also the name of the estate or fv:kun-ngeykimuk for this region.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mamarrungbe\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de CHECK\
\
\\lx mamawurren\
\\ps v.\
\\de place around the body\
\\nt check.\
\
\\lx mambard\
\\ps n.\
\\de billycan\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde biliken\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mamkorn\
\\lc man-mamkorn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de small tree species, unidentified, sandstone escarpment habitat, round fruit 1.5cm furry like a peach, bark\
hard rough grey tessalated, leaf velvet-like, looses leaves in dry season.\
\\uv E\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mamkorn\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Ficus.subpubarula\
\\re fi:Ficus-subpubarula\
\\de kind of fig tree, food of many rock kangaroos such as fv:nabarlek, fv:badbong and the rock ringtail possum fv:djorrkkun.\
\\xv An-mamkorn nabarlek, badbong, djorrkkun ka-ngun.\
\\xe The fi:Ficus-subpubarula is eaten by nabarleks, short-eared rock wallabies and rock ringtail possums.\
\\sc Ficus subpubarula\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\p anmamkorn/Ficus subpubarula.3.jpg\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mamnernemi\
\\pr an-\
\\va an-mamnenemi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Gompholobium.subulata\
\\re fi:Gompholobium_subulata\
\\de small whispy shrub with compound leaves and yellow flowers\
\\sc Gompholobium subulata\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mamomo\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.sp.\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_cajuputi\
\\de Cajaput paperbark, has a greenish oil with a camphoraceous odour.\
\\sc Melaleuca cajuputi\
\\sd plants\
\\sy anmurlmu\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\dt 15/Nov/2011\
\
\\lx Mamurdak\
\\va Amurdak\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language name\
\\de the Bininj Kunwok name for the Amurdak language\
\\ee A dialect of Amurdak, now extinct, was spoken by coastal Ulbu people in the Ardahaj (Pawpaw Beach) region. This language is called\
Urrirrk or Wurrirrkwurrirrk\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\so John Dalngadalnga\
\\bb Handelsmann, R. (1991). Towards a description of Amurdak: A language of northern Australia. Unpublished BA (Hons) thesis,\
University of Melbourne, Melbourne.\
\\uv I\
\\ur W, Kdj, Djnj= Amurdak\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx mamurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\de Kuninjku public ceremony of diplomacy.\
\\ee The Kunib\'ccdji and Kunbarlang equivalent is fv:midjdjarn and for eastern groups, fv:marradjiri.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Manangayhbalhmeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place name in Djalama clan estate. Located on the Maningrida to Darwin road, this rocky creek is the location of a mermaid or fv:yawkyawk djang. Non-Aboriginal people call this place 'Dreaming Lady'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Manangkarri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language name\
\\de name of a language, now extinct, once spoken on coastal mainland region south of Goulburn Island\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx manarlinj\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cluster.fig\
\\re cluster fig\
\\re fi:Ficus_racemosa\
\\de cluster fig\
\\sc Ficus racemosa\
\\ur Kdj= an-marnawan\
\\sd plant\
\\p DSC01854.jpg, DSC01855.jpg\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx man-derrebulke\
\\pr man-\
\\re rock banyan fig tree\
\\re fi:Ficus_virens (rock country variety)\
\\de Banyan fig tree variety that grows in the rock on the plateau or escarpment country. The ordinary variety is called fv:an-bornde.\
\\sc Ficus virens\
\\sd plants\
\\uv Kdj, some W.\
\\dt 29/Jan/2015\
\
\\lx Mankadjarra\
\\ps n.\
\\de Macassan\
\\dt 26/Nov/2015\
\
\\lx Mankawang Kani\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Mankawang Kani is a stone quarry in the Djurlka estate, visited for the quartzite found there. This would be used to make stone tools such as Manbirrmulu stone blade spears. It is located on the plateau above the Djurlka waterfall, about 3km southwest of the waterfall on a tributary creek. It is an area of springs and jungle thicket. The site name means literally \'91Commelina ensifolia (tree sp.) it sits\'92.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Manyawko Djang\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx marnawokwok\
\\va marniwokwok, manawokwok\
\\ps n.\
\\re banded fruit dove\
\\re dove species, banded fruit dove\
\\re fi:Ptilinopus cinctus\
\\de Banded fruit dove. Some speakers say fv:marnawokwok is a female and the Torres Straight pigeon is a male of the same kind. In Kundedjnjenghmi this name is also applied to the Torres Strait pigeon.\
\\sc Ptilinopus cinctus\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx Manawukan\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge prop.n.\
\\re Maningrida\
\\de Kuninjku name for Maningrida.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx manbarladjidji\
\\ps n.\
\\ge duck.sp.\
\\re plumed whistling-duck\
\\re grass whistling-duck\
\\re fi:Dendrocygna_eytoni\
\\de Plumed whistling-duck, also known as grass whistling duck.\
\\sc Dendrocygna eytoni\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx Manbarnebarne\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in the Tin Camp Creek region\
\\de Headwaters of one of the tributaries that flows from the north to Marlungkurrk in the south (about 2 km away) and into Tin Camp Creek. This is in rocky escarpment country around 30km southwest of Mamardawerre, and the water flows off the scarp into the open forest of Tin Camp Creek valley.  \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Manbenj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate, a fish trapping site in the fv:Mimarlarr area (Altman 1985).\
\
\\lx Manberrk Ngankorroboy\
\\ps n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in the Kibulmaniyimarra estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Manbilbubumi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Open stretch of the Goomadeer River just south of Kuyikuymi, in between Kunyikuymi and a tributary creek which enters the Goomadeer from the east. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx manbiri\
\\ge sea.turtle\
\\re sea turtle (generic)\
\\de Generic term for all sea turtles. Bininj Gunwok speakers are inland people and do not have many terms for marine species.\
\\uv W, I\
\\ur E= mankurli\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 28/Feb/2014\
\
\\lx manbolidj-manbolidj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fern.sp.\
\\re fi:Platyzoma_microphyllum\
\\de kind of small fern that grows in sandsheets often close to water\
\\sc Platyzoma microphyllum\
\\xv Wurdurd kabirri-yirrhke worrno manbolidj-manbolidj manbu.\
\\xe Children like to run their fingers along the stem to remove the leaves of fi:Platyzoma_microphyllum.\
\\uv I\
\\ur Djnj= an-kardid, Kdj= an-djilard\
\\sd plant \
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Manborndekayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de swamp country in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate on Tomkinson River flood plain near fv:Bulkay.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Manboyberredjambarrhbun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate near Kudjaldordo creek.\
\
\\lx Manboyhkarri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place just south-west of Mumeka in fv:Kurulk clan estate.\
\
\\lx Manbudjubkayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de the 'town' camp area at Marrkolidjban Homeland Centre where the houses are located. Marrkolidjban is\
a 'big' area name.\
\\dv Kun-red kure ngad karrih-yo Marrkolidjban\
\\ee kun-bolk yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Manbulukarri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Mumeka landing on Liverpool River in fv:Marrin clan estate.\
\\lit 'place of Xanthostemon paradoxus'\
\
\\lx Mandedjkadjang\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re estate name\
\\re place name\
\\de Estate name in the lower Liverpool River region. Also the name for an outstation in this region, near Marrkolidjban.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Mandemrdokordorlmeng\
\\va Mandem Dokodorlmeng\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate. fv:mandem 'Corm of white flowered water lily'\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx mandiddi\
\\ps n.\
\\re grunter spp.\
\\de Banded Grunter / Black-striped Grunter\
\\xv Dolbbo, Kubumi ka-rri.\
\\xe There are Banded Grunter fish at Kubumi (on the Mann River).\
\\sc Amniataba percoides\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= dolbbo\
\\sd fish\
\
\\lx Mandilbareng\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Spring and outstation around 8km west-southwest of Mamardawerre outstation. Mandilbareng is also the name of the estate where these are located. The modern outstation was first established by Isaiah Burrunali. The spring is half a kilometre west of the outstation, and often attracts flying foxes. There are stands of pandanus and paperbark in the water. There is an old vehicle track which goes from Mandilbareng to Nimbuwa.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Mandudjmi Djang\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate, but this is also a common name for many other green plum sacred sites. Literally 'totemic site of fi:Buchanonia_obovata'\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Mandumbulh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mandumburr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate where a gravel quarry is today situated. Not far from Mumeka\
Homeland Centre.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mandjabbirlhbirl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge koel\
\\re koel\
\\re common koel\
\\re fi:Eudynamys_scolopacea\
\\de Common koel.\
\\sc Eudynamys scolopacea\
\\sy djawok, djowok\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx Mandjabubidbom\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate on a creek, site of fish trapping.\
\\lit Conical fish trap climbed up.\
\
\\lx Mandjalarrkkayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate visited as a source of red ochre.\
\
\\lx mandjangarli\
\\ps n.\
\\ge darter\
\\re darter\
\\re fi:Anhinga_melanogaster_novaehollandiae\
\\de Australian darter.\
\\sc Anhinga melanogaster novaehollandiae\
\\sy djingarrarr\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= kunbad karrulebun; W= kardabaybay, kunwardde karrulubun, Kdj= kardabaybay\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mandjorlok-mandjorlok\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lily.trotter\
\\re Comb-crested jacana\
\\re Lily trotter\
\\re fi:Irediparra_gallinacea\
\\de Comb crested jacana (also called lily-trotter or Jesus bird); walks on floating plants.  Associated with fv:yirridjdja moiety and the fv:yabbarrurruwa ceremony.\
\\sc Irediparra gallinacea\
\\sy karrekuyengkuyeng\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= karrekuyengkuyeng, Kdj= dakarrekuyengkuyeng\
\\ee yirridjdja/yabbarrurruwa\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx Mandjulngunj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of possibly 4 different patriclans; a Kunwinjku fi:duwa moiety Mandjulngunj in the region to the east and north-east of Kunbarlanja, another a Mengerr fi:yirridjdja moiety Mandjulngunj on which the settlement of Kunbarlanja (Oenpelli) is situated, the\
third, a Mawng Mandjulngunj, fi:yirridjdja moiety in the King River and Wellington Ranges district of western Arnhem Land and the fourth a now extinct Ngaduk language patriclan in north-east Kakadu National Park.\
\\xv Bu Kunbarlanja ngarre, Kunbarlanja ngarrben-djawan bininj nga-djawan and bininj na-kohbanj minj nakohbanj bad\
yawurrinj, minj ka-kodjbulu ka-djalbengkan. Ngarri-djawan konda na-ngale nuye kun-red, 'Mandjulngunj' ka-yime. \
\\xe If you and I go to Kunbarlanja and we ask people there, an old person and not just an older person, a young man also, someone who\
doesn't have grey hair, they would know [immediately]. If we ask 'Whose country is this [here at Kunbarlanja] he would say\
'Mandjulngunj'.\
\\xv Bonj wanjh konda bu konda Mandjulngunj kun-red bonj manu mani ngarr-bidbun nungka wanjh Maningkali manu\
mane man-berrk\
\\xe This is all Mandjulngunj country here, but if we go up [upstream in the catchment] it is Maningkali- all of this open forest savanna\
here.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx manekke\
\\ps dem.\
\\de that previously referred to, that known topic of discourse (agrees with vegetable class nouns).\
\
\\lx Manengkarerrbe\
\\va Manengkarerrben\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan in the mouth of the Liverpool River associated with the Kunibidji and Kundjirrbara (now extinct) languages. Manengkarerrbe clan members today speak the Ndj\'e9bbana language.\
\\ee Manengkarerrbe clan members today speak the Ndj\'e9bbana language.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx manewarn\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Brachychiton.sp.\
\\re fi:Brachychiton_megaphyllus\
\\de Red-flowered kurrajong.\
\\sc Brachychiton megaphyllus\
\\sy an-warnwarn\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-djarrmanj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mani\
\\va manih, mahni\
\\ps dem.\
\\sn 1\
\\de This one here (agrees with vegetable class nouns).\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx manidjukkura\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de small or young specimens of northern spotted barramundi\
\\sc Scleropages jardini\
\\uv W\
\
\\lx Manilakarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of an Urningangk language patriclan in the Kakadu-western Arnhem Land border region\
\\xv Namarnde Bangolkarrmeng... ngamed nawu Wamud nuye na-ngamed Nayingul, ngamed kun-nguya njamed na-Manilakarr.\
\\xe Namarnde Bangolkarrmeng ... belongs to Wamud, whatsisname, Nayingul, of the whatsit, Manilakarr patriclan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx manem\
\\lc kun-manem\
\\va manemno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de chest\
\
\\lx manimbala\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de a kind of bush potato\
\\sc There are two Linnaen names; Flamingia portulacastrum and Galactia tenuiflora.\
\\ee similar to fv:bulkud\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx manimunak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge magpie.goose\
\\re magpie goose\
\\re fi:Anseranus_semipalmata\
\\de Magpie goose, pied goose.\
\\sc Anseranus semipalmata\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\pdn kk = karlko\
\\ur I=murnubbarr, Kdj= bamurru\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx manin\
\\ps dem.\
\\de this one (close distance).\
\
\\lx Maningkali\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan on the southern Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Maningkali karrard ngayi nga-yime. Nani nuye nahni.\
\\xe My mother's country is Maningkali, it belongs to this man here [i.e. he is a Maningkali clansman].\
\\xv Maningkali Manganawal.\
\\ee The Maningkali clan [is a member of the] Manganawal [clan confederation].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx mankan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fall down, land (of aircraft)\
\
\\lx Mankarnbaldjikayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Billabong and area near Namokardabu in fv:na-born country.\
\
\\lx Mankarnbul\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate near the Darwin-Maningrida road.\
\
\\lx Mankarrard\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de billabong in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx Mankihki\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name\
\\de one of the fv:yikurrumu ritualistic names for the Kardbam clan.\
\\ee fv:Bakkarda is another fi:yikurrumu name for the Kardbam clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Mankodbekayo\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de seasonal camp (early dry) near billabong in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate on Tomkinson River flood plain.\
\\xv Kun-red kun-kuken Mankodbekayo.\
\\xe Mankodbekayo is an important place.\
\
\\lx Mankolekoweng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de 'jump up' on road between Mumeka and Marrkolidjban in Barrbin clan estate.\
\
\\lx Mankorlod\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de monsoon vine thicket near the Mann River in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate. Not to be confused with the\
Homeland Centre of the same name in fv:Kardbam clan estate.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Mankorlod\
\\va Ngankorlod, Ankorlod\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de Outstation in na-Kardbam clan estate. Mankorlod is actually situated on a sacred site, the nature of\
which is not public knowledge.\
\\uv I/E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Mankombod\
\\va Ankombod\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Area on the East Alligator River about 40km southeast (upstream) from Cahill's Crossing. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 4/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Mankorroboy\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de place near Kawidji relating to fv:mimih spirits.\
\\nt check\
\
\\lx Mankuladjkanini\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate near Kurddukarri\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mankumirli\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de very large specimen of Silver Barramundi\
\\sy wardurrkku\
\
\\lx Mankungkangeyh\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\sn 1\
\\de place in fv:Balngarra clan estate with rock art galleries close to Dukaladjarranj\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee duwa\
\\sn 2\
\\de fv:Ankungkangeyh; place in Mok clan estate near Kabulwarnamyo outstation on the Arnhem Land\
plateau which is a honey sacred site\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Mankurla\
\\va Ankurla\
\\ph\
\\ps n. place\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge place name\
\\re place in Balngarra clan estate\
\\de place in the Balngarra clan estate on the Maningrida road to Bolkdjam and Buluh\
Kaduru.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mankurli\
\\ge sea.turtle\
\\re sea turtle (generic)\
\\de Generic term for all sea turtles. Bininj Gunwok speakers are inland people and do not have many terms for marine species.\
\\uv E\
\\ur W, I= manbiri\
\\sd reptiles\
\\dt 28/Feb/2014\
\
\\lx Manlarrh Kadedjdjamdi\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Mankorlod estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx manmakkawarri\
\\ps n.\
\\re catfish sp.\
\\re Salmon catfish\
\\re fi:Neoarius_graeffei\
\\re fi:Neoarius_leptaspis\
\\de A less frequently used name for two species of salmon (or \'91fork-tailed\'92) catfish. The more commonly used name in Kunwinjku is fv: ngalmakkawarri.\
\\sc Neoarius graeffei, Neoarius leptaspis\
\\ur I= ngadjdjelek\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 24/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx Manmarnanj Djang\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Manmawobidbom\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de A place a few hundred metres downstream from Yikarrakkal outstation.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Manmoyi\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\sn 1\
\\de homeland centre/outstation in Burdoh clan estate on the Mann River\
\\sn 2\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate on fv:Mankorlod creek, south of fv:Mankorlod homeland\
community. It is a wide open area of sandstone along a watercourse. There are small depressions in the\
rock which are said to be the footprints of the fv:Nakorrkko father and son creation ancestors.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx manmoyi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of tree, green plum/Kakadu plum\
\\sc Buchanania obovata\
\\sy (m)andudjmi\
\\uv I, W, E\
\
\\lx Manngal Kadjurrme\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de Large wetland area which includes small tributaries of the Liverpool River, north-west of Mumeka.\
\
\\lx man-ngalili\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de white currant\
\\sc Seccuriginea melanthesoides.\
\
\\lx Manrolkani\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de Camp swimming hole on Marrkolidjban creek.\
\
\\lx manu\
\\ps dem.\
\\de that one\
\\uv southern Mayali\
\
\\lx man-wardde-kudjikudji\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de escarpment outlier country with scattered rock formations.\
\
\\lx mang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de get, obtain, collect\
\\pdn kk = -modme\
\
\\lx Mangalara\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of an Iwaidja patriclan with coastal territory in north-west Arnhem Land\
\\xv Arrambidj bolkmangalara.\
\\xe Arrambidj (De Courcy Head) is a Mangalara clan place.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx mangalerrek\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de grass species which grows on open plain country e.g. at Bulkay on the Tomkinson River flood plain.\
\\sc Leptocarpus spathaceus\
\\sn 2\
\\de necklace or belt made from cut stems of fv:Leptocarpus spathaceus\} and used in the fv:Wubarr\
ceremony.\
\\ee Thin stemmed specimens said to be fv:na-mardku and thick stemmed ones fv:na-ngarradjku \
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mangalerrek\
\\ps n.\
\\ge male.yam\
\\re male yam\
\\re yam type\
\\de Long yams are said to be both male and female. The male yam is called fv:mangalerrek.\
\\xv Mangalerrek manu bininj makka, karrbarda.\
\\xe Mangalerrek is the name for the male long yam.\
\\uv W\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Jul/2012\
\
\\lx mangalerrek\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re fi:Leptocarpus.spathaceus\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of grass used to make necklaces\
\\sc Leptocarpus spathaceus\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= mangalerrek\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mangalorrbbo\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Lepyrodia.spp.\
\\re fi:Lepyrodia_spp.\
\\de kind of grass\
\\xv An-mangalorrbbo yiman kayime mangalerrek dja kukbuyika, mangalerrek ankimuk. Anmangalorrbbo anyahwurd\
mani.\
\\xe The fi:Lepyrodia_spp. grass is similar to fv:Leptocarpus spathaceus but it is different in that the latter is bigger. fi:Lepyrodia spp. is\
this small one here.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Lepyrodia spp.\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Mangardabolo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\re place name\
\\de Place on the lower Tomkinson River, on a tributary of the Tomkinson where the fv:Nakorrkko ancestors travelled.\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx mangerrngerrno\
\\va kun-mangerrngerr.\
\\ps n.\
\\de gills of fish.\
\\xv Karri-dangbakke djenj karri-bebke mangerrngerrno.\
\\xe When we break the head of fish (to carry them on poles) we reveal their gills.\
\
\\lx Manginburru\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge tribal name\
\\re tribal name, ethnonym for Goomadeer River people\
\\re Goomadeer (Kumadderr) River catchment people\
\\de Name (or ethnonym) that includes all people with country in the Gumardir (Goomadeer) River Catchment \'97 from rocky headwaters to coastal mudflats. This includes Kunwinjku and Mawng language clans.\
\\xv Korroko Manginburru bininj birri-ni kun-red ngardduk.\
\\xe A long time ago Manginburru people lived on my land.\
\\dt 07/Apr/2009\
\
\\lx mangirk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de shark species, Black-tipped Shark.\
\
\\lx Mangkadjarra\
\\ps n.\
\\de Macassan, Macassar\
\\bw from Makassarese mangk\'b7sara? 'Makassar(ese)'.\
\
\\lx mangkubbarl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fish.sp.\
\\re fish sp.\
\\de fish sp.\
\\sc ?\
\
\\lx mangkuwil\
\\ps n.\
\\re saltwater, sea\
\\re sea\
\\re ocean\
\\de Saltwater, ocean, sea.\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, W\
\\sy kurrula\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 10/Dec/2014\
\
\\lx Mang\'9cbum\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mang\'9clerrek\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mang\'falorrbbo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de grass species\
\\ee Barrk nuye ka-ngun.\
\\xe The black rock wallaroo eats it.\
\\uv E\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx manj\
\\lc kun-manj\
\\ps n.\
\\de taste\
\
\\lx manjakku\
\\lc noun class/PRON.manjakku\
\\ps adj.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de small\
\\xv Ngal-manjakku kan-weybu ngayi ngane-mrndi.\
\\pde Ngal-yaw kano ngayi ngane-yo.\
\\xe Give me the young one (promise) as a wife.\
\\pde -yahwurd.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx manjalkmanjalk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of plant\
\\sc Calycopeplus casuarinoides??\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj = anbiddengdeng\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx manjamanjakku\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de children\
\\pde wurdurd\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx manjarlhmanjarlh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de plant name, unidentified\
\\ee string plant used for fv:djerrh\
\\sc check (ask Peter Cooke).\
\
\\lx manj-bekkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de taste something\
\
\\lx manj-bengkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de keep tasting or eating something\
\\lit "know the taste"\
\\xv Wanjh munguyh beneh-manjbengkang man-kung nawu beneh-kolhnguneng mak warridj\
bu beneh-kolhnguneng.\
\\xe And those two also just kept on eating that honey.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx manjbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de express affection or gratitude.\
\\xv Birri-bekkang danginj Balang birrim-wokngimeng birri-manjbom.\
\\xe When they heard that Balang was born they telephoned to express affection for him.\
\
\\lx mandjurdurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Olive Python\
\\sc Liasis olivaceus\
\\pdn kk = ngalwirnyi.\
\
\\lx manjh\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'hang on', 'not yet.'\
\
\\lx Manjhkilkilyo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de dreaming ancestor who travelled the stone country of western and southern Arnhem Land\
\
\\lx manjmak\
\\lc man-manjmak\
\\ps adj.\
\\de good taste, sweet\
\
\\lx manjmeng\
\\lc yi-manjmeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg.,my niece, your wife, we are cousins ie. fv:na-kurrng.\
\\cn ngal-dumanj.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx manjmin\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lerp\
\\re lerps, Eucalyptus lerps, small variety\
\\de edible lerps, which are the white tent like shelters that tiny psyllid insects make on eucalypt leaves. A larger variety is known as\
fv:man-buyali.\
\\sd plant\
\\sy (m)an-buyali, (m)an-bundjak\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx mardabulh-mardabul\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of water lily with flowers that stand out of the water on stalks.\
\\sc possibly Nymphoides hydrocharoides\
\\nt CHECK\
\
\\lx mardardakinje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 'smoke out' a place or object after the death of somebody, a mortuary cleansing ritual which involves burning ironwood leaves to produce smoke.\
\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx mardadubba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of sorghum grass ('spear grass') which is classified by patrimoiety as fv:duwa.\
\\xv Anbedje werrk kabardbakme, mardadubba yerre.\
\\xe The fv:yirridjdja moiety sorghum grass falls down first and then the fv:duwa moiety variety falls later.\
\\dt 25/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx mardamarda\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.torulosa\
\\re fi:Acacia_torulosa\
\\de kind of Acacia tree\
\\ee fi:Acacia_plectocarpa and fi:Acacia_torulosa are very similar and easy to confuse with each other. However, the seed pods of the two\
trees are quite different, fi:Acacia_torulosa having much longer and narrower pods.\
\\sc Acacia torulosa\
\\sy an-morrbo\
\\uv Djnj (an-), E (man-)\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mardawkmardawk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re fi:Eriachne_sp.\
\\de kind of perennial grass\
\\sc Eriachne sp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mardayin\
\\ps n. ceremonial\
\\sn 1\
\\de large regional secret ceremony of both duwa and yirridjdja patri-moieties 2.This word also refers to\
the sacred cross-hatching or fv:rarrk painted on the chests of certain people involved in the ceremony.\
Also the designs painted on the chests of boys at fv:walk ceremonies are called fv:mardayin. This style\
of fv:rarrk is often used on bark paintings.\
\\ee Also Yolngu languages and all other Western and Central Arnhem Land languages.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mardayin\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de major regional ceremony associated with both duwa and yirridjdja moieties 2. fine cross hatching\
designs relating to the ceremony.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mardba\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Eucalyptus.phoenicea\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_phoenicea\
\\de kind of Eucalyptus tree\
\\uv E, I (man-mardba), Djnj (an-mardba)\
\\ee Man-mardba yekkekeno ka-kodi.\
\\xe fi:Eucalyptus_phoenicea flowers in the dry season.\
\\sc Eucalyptus phoenicea\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Mardbalk\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de Warrawi/Goulburn Island\
\
\\lx marddarda\
\\lc kun-marddarda\
\\va marddardano\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de collar bone.\
\
\\lx marddarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge prawn.sp.\
\\re prawn sp.\
\\re freshwater prawn\
\\re Macrobrachium bullatum\
\\de Small freshwater shrimp from the Arnhem Land plateau.\
\\sc Macrobrachium bullatum\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 07/Mar/2014 \
\
\\lx mardderr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Melaleuca species. This is described as a western dialect term which the Kuninjku sometimes use. The placename 'Kumardderr' which Balanda call the Goomadeer River means Melaleucas with bark which can be removed for use are said to make up a group of three; man-rdar, baridjbarr and man-korrongko.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mardderr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge paperbark.sp.\
\\re paperbark sp.\
\\de Silver-leaved paperbark. Some Kuninjku speakers use this term as the fv:kun-kurrng respect register term for paperbark. Some speakers say that this name is a generic term for all paperbarks which have removable useful bark.\
\\sc Melaleuca argentea\
\\uv W \
\\ur I=man-rdar, baridjbarr, man-korrko.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mardebulhmardebulh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of aquatic herb\
\\xv Mardebulhmardebulh lam ka-karrme kanjdji ku-kurlk. Karridjeddjedme karri-ngolung karri-dong wanjh ka-kobke berkno wanjh karri-ngun.\
\\xe The fv:Nymphoides indica has a small tuber under the ground. We slice it up, roast it on the coals, pound it and then the mash becomes soft and we eat it.\
\\sc Nymphoides indica\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 23/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx mardendordno\
\\lc na-mardendordno\
\\ps n.\
\\de Leichhardt grasshopper\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx mardidjdjak\
\\va an-mardidjdjal, an-mardidjak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge herb.sp.\
\\re herb sp.\
\\re fi:Cartonema_parviflorum\
\\de Slender herbaceous perennial to 25 cm high. Tubers: obovate to globoid, 10-12 mm diameter, surrounded by several loose brown papery sheaths; tubers replaced annually.\
Leaves: grass-like, hairy, linear tapering to a fine point, blade 80-150 mm long.\
Flowers: cream with 3 petals, to about 25 mm diameter, sepals persist after the petals fall giving the plant a spiky appearance. It has tubers which are eaten in fv:kudjewk. Needs to be peeled and cooked with the small round tubers roasted briefly on hot coals. Many are necessary to provide a good meal. Large quantities were collected for consumption during ceremonies. Found in rocky ridges and in the plateau rock country. Good kangaroo tucker. fi:Cartonema_parviflorum is said to be the fv:an-badjan or \'91mother plant\'92 of the smaller fi:Cartonema_spicatum.\
\\xv Mardidjdjak manbu arri-ngun an-badjan.\
\\xe The larger 'mother' plant is fi:Cartonema_parviflorum, which we eat.\
\\sc Cartonema parviflorum\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 28/Oct/2011\
\
\\lx an-mardidjdjak\
\\cf See: mardidjdjak\
\
\\lx mardku\
\\lc na-mardku\
\\ps n.\
\\de matrilineal moiety name\
\\an na-ngarradjku\
\
\\lx mardku\
\\lc na-mardku\
\\ps n.\
\\de matrimoiety name\
\\an na-ngarradjku\
\\ee Na-mardku moiety is divided into two sub-matrimoieties; fv:yarriyarnkurrk and fv:yarriwurrkkarr.\
\
\\lx mardno\
\\ps n.\
\\de lightning bolts\
\\xv Nakka wanjh mardno, nga-mard-kurrmekurrmeng.\
\\xe These are bolts of lightning, I've placed lightning bolts all over (the painting).\
\
\\lx mardorrk\
\\lc kun-mardorrk\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de ears\
\\pde kun-kanem.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mardorrkyambah\
\\ps adj.\
\\de crazy, mad, stupid\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bengwarr\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx marduhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de flash (light)\
\\xv Na-marrkon ka-marduhke.\
\\xe The lightning spirit flashes light.\
\\xv Mardumarduhkeng.\
\\xe The lightning kept on flashing.\
\
\\lx mardukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de flash, reflect brightly\
\\xv Warrak ka-kuk-borledme ka-kuk-mardukme.\
\\xe The Leichhardtian Bony Bream (Fluvialosa erebi) turns its body sideways and reflects a flash of light.\
\
\\lx Mard\'9ckodjlad\
\\ps place name\
\\ge prop.n.\
\\re place in fv:Waybburda estate\
\\de Place in Kune/Dangbon-speaking fv:Waybburda clan estate on tributary of upper Cadell River; site named by the fv:Nakorrkko.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx marla\
\\ge scorpion\
\\re scorpion\
\\de scorpion\
\\sd insects\
\
\\lx marladj\
\\ps n.\
\\re orphan\
\\de Orphan child.\
\\xv Birri-doy rowk, wanjh birri-kayhmeng," marladj", birri-marneyimeng, "Yimray ngundiwon". Yimarnek kam-kuyinwam kondanj darnkih "Ya", birri-marne-yimeng, wanjh nalkiduhdurndi djalwam wanjh doweng kun-marrwe.\
\\xe They pounded all the food, then they called him 'orphan boy' they said, "Come, they'll give you some." He came close up then "ya", they said to him [they tricked him and didn't give him the food] and so he went back crying and starving.\
\
\\lx marladj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge dragon\
\\re two-lined dragon\
\\re fi:Diporiphora_spp.\
\\de Various lined-dragons e.g.two-lined dragon and the eastern white-lipped two-lined dragon.\
\\sc Diporiphora bilineata, Diporiphora albilabris sobria\
\\uv E\
\\ur W, Djnj= kengborlh, madjandemed, I= kalkkalk, Kdj= kulirri\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\
\\lx marlk\
\\lc kun-marlk\
\\va marlkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de liver\
\\uv E, I\
\\ur W= kun-diw, diwno\
\\pdn kk = kun-malkdjakarlno.\
\\dt 16/Jun/2016\
\
\\lx morlng\
\\ps n.\
\\ge blowfly spp.\
\\re blowfly spp.\
\\de certain kinds of blowflies, Calliphoridae flies and also Lauxoniid and Tachnid flies\
\\sc (family) Calliphoridae\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx marlak\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge billy.goat.plum\
\\re bily goat plum\
\\re fi:Terminalia_ferdinandiana\
\\de billy goat plum\
\\sc Terminalia ferdinandiana\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\ur I= man-djiribidj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx marlakka\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de very small tightly woven sacred dilly bag worn around the neck and containing cutting implements for\
ritual purposes\
\\dv Djerrh nawu man-djamun kun-djak-kenh ka-karrme.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Marlanj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place_name\
\\re place on the East Alligator River\
\\de place on the middle reaches of the East Alligator River\
\\xv Marlanj kanjdji, dolobbo djang kaddum. Marlanj man-bokimuk ku-kabo bukka wanjh Marlanj nawu Manilakarr\
duninj. Dja kaddum Marlanj ka-burnbun wanjh Bolmo dja Warddjak. Kumekke fi:start ka-yime wanjh yi-balbebme\
kure Kundjikurdubuk. Kundjikurdubuk, Djidburdburd kure kebdjined djang. Yungki bale man-kabo kure yi-djaldi\
Kundjalerri Kayo. Dja kaddum kure narlangak dulumnameng bono man-dulum.\
\\xe Marlanj is downstream and the dolobbo dreaming is upstream. . Marlanj waterhole right in the middle of East Alligator and that is\
Manilakarr. Where Marlanj finishes upstream then it is Bolmo and Warddjak clan country. That's where Warddjak clan starts and then\
you keep going upstream to Kundjikurdubuk. At Kundjikurdubuk and Djidburdburd are the respiratory illness totemic sites. Further\
upstream on the river is Kundjalerri Kayo. And further upstream from there are the hills that the frilled-neck lizard placed there and the\
tributary (off the East Alligator River).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 22/Aug/2007\
\\co\
\
\\lx marlaworrno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de leaves of any plant\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx marlba\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de Ironwood\
\\sc Erythrophleum chlorostachys\
\\pde man-dubang\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Marlba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\re place name\
\\de Place name, a quartzite stone tool quarry in the Marlkawo region of the Arnhem Land plateau.\
\
\\lx Marlbbarradji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of two coastal patriclans in western Arnhem land. One is a Warlang [Kunbarlang] speaking group and the other is Mawng and Kunwinjku, the latter is located in Rolling Bay, the former in the western side of the mouth of the Liverpool River.\
\\xv La Marlbbarrdji Kunmarung birri-wokdi birri-ni birri-dawurruwong kun-wok Yibadja bene-wokdi Kunmarung\
birri-wokdi. Nani na-Barlang, Kurikuri May'rri kurrmerrinj bonj. Ngorrkdjobkeng, beh Kamulkbarn, beh kahwi.\
\\xe One Marlbbarrdji clan is Mawng, they gave that clan to those languages [iwaidja and Mawng] and so they speak Iwaidja and Mawng. But Kurikuri [a clan aggregate name] is associated with the Kunbarlang language and it placed itself here at Mayirri, that's all. It cuts off and Kamulkbarn clan is this way [points].\
\\so Jimmy Bungurru\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx marlbbinjbinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de ceremonial staff carried by Ubarr ceremony messangers who travel to distant places to bring people to\
the ceremony.\
\\xv Marlbbinjbinj kakan alngayakmi. Nungan alngayakmi kakarrme nungan nabuyika\
ka-karrme, ka-djabname kabani-mirrkmarren kuburldjdjarn kadjabdi berrewoneng.\
\\xe The Ubarr ceremonial messengers carry fv:marlbbinjbinj staffs. One places it into the ground and the\
other does the same and they sit facing each other with the fv:marlbbinjbinj standing up in the middle\
between them.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx marlbme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de flash light, reflect light in a bright flash.\
\\xv Warrak ka-kuk-borledme ka-werrk-marlbme.\
\\xe The Bony Bream turns on its side and reflects a flash of sunlight.\
\\xv Kukak 'aeroplane' kam-re ka-marlbmarlbme.\
\\xe Aircraft at night come with a flashing light.\
\
\\lx marli\
\\lc man-marli\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge hook\
\\re pandanus hook\
\\de wooden hooked stick used for collecting the central new shoots of pandanus trees\
\\ee Pandanus leaves have sharp spikes along the margins which makes it very difficult to reach up into the\
centre of the plant to pull out the inner new leaf sheath. Hooked sticks are therefore fashioned to reach\
up and pull down the sheaths without being pierced by the numerous spikes on the leaf edges.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Marlimarli\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in the Kune/Dangbon speaking fv:Waybburda estate on a creek tributary of the upper Cadell River some two kilometres east of the Korlobidahdah to Yaymini road and about 9 kilometres north of Yaymini. Also a fv:Na-korrkko ancestor site.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx marlinjdji\
\\ps n. \
\\sn 1\
\\re praying mantis\
\\de Praying mantis\
\\sn 2\
\\de flying ant\
\\ee the praying mantis is affiliated with the Lorrkkon or bone pole ceremony.\
\\xv Marlinjdji kun-waral bininj.\
\\xe The flying ant has a human spirit.\
\\sd insects\
\
\\lx Marlirri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Rembarrnga fi:duwa moiety patriclan in the upper Cadell River region\
\\xv Dumerrbobo bolkmarlirri.\
\\xe Dumerrbobo is a Marilirri clan place.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx marlk\
\\lc man-marlk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de stick from a stringy-bark tree fv:(Eucalyptus tetrodonta).\
\
\\lx marlwa\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge spirit.being\
\\re spirit being\
\\de Malevolent spirit being, ghost.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge song.series\
\\re song series name\
\\de Name of a song set performed in Kuninjku and Kunbarlang languages. Also  associated with song sets called fv:mimih 'rock spirit' or fv:yawkyawk 'young woman/mermaid'.\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx marlkwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de attach a stick from a stringy bark tree to something, usually to the top and bottom of a bark painting to\
prevent it from warping.\
\\cf man-marlk\
\\ce stick from a Eucalyptus tetrodonta tree\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx marlum\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1.\
\\re Torres Strait Pigeon\
\\re fi:Ducula_bicolor\
\\de Torres Strait Pigeon (also called Torresian imperial pigeon)\
\\sc Ducula bicolor\
\\uv I, W\
\\od Djnj= marnawokwok\
\\sn 2.\
\\re fi:Chalcophaps_indica\
\\de Emerald dove.\
\\sc Chalcophaps indica\
\\sd bird\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Marlungkurrk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in the Tin Camp Creek region\
\\de Marlungkurrk is an area in the upper reaches of the Tin Camp Creek valley, comprising savannah, a section of the creek and caves with rock art. There is a camping site here on the banks of the creek. The creek at this place is considered to be fv:manbodjamun, sacred water. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx marlyirr\
\\ps n.\
\\de pimple.\
\
\\lx Marnanan\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of an Iwaidja patriclan in north-west Arnhem Land, now extinct. The last member was said to be Bob Mangarnawu. The estate\
was centred on the region of the Marrgarnalal plains and Umanaj billabong, an area shared in a company relationship with various\
other patriclans. \
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx marnanj\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kurrajong\
\\re red-flowered kurrajong\
\\re fi:Brachychiton_paradoxum\
\\de red-flowered kurrajong\
\\sc Brachychiton paradoxum\
\\uv Djnj, W = man-marnanj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Marnarrbo\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de familiar name for the male black wallaroo usually called fv:nadjinem or fv:barrk.\
\\sc Macropus bernadus.\
\
\\lx Marnayemarra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name\
\\de One of the fi:yikurrumu ritualistic names for the Kurulk clan, the others being Kandadjdja and Wulkku\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx marnbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de make, build\
\\sn 2\
\\de fix\
\\cf marnburren\
\\ce transfigure self\
\\xv Bininj birri-marnburrinj narin.\
\\xe Some men turned themselves into snakes.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx marndengabek\
\\pr an-\
\\va\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fi:Dolichandrone_filiformis\
\\re fi:Dolichandrone_filiformis\
\\de sparse tree up to 6m with long pinnate leaves\
\\xv An-marndengabek kun-darleh arri-marnbun yendeno.\
\\xe We make firestick drills from the branches of fi:Dolichandrone_filiformis.\
\\sc Dolichandrone filiformis\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-dengabek, man-birne\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 22/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx marndi\
\\ps modal particle\
\\re might, otherwise [x might happen]\
\\de A preverbal particle expressing apprehensive clauses when combined with the non-past and meaning \'91might\'92 or \'91otherwise an undesirable outcome will happen\'92. In Kuninjku the equivalent is fv:wardi or fv:warde with fv:marndi only being used in the fv:kun-kurrng register. Kundjeyhmi mostly uses fv:wardi but sometimes also fv:marndi. May sometimes have a prohibitive sense \'91you must not [otherwise]\'92.\
\\xv Marndi yimankan.\
\\xe You might fall down.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\xv Minj nangale kawarddeburriwe, karrulkbakke, manme kangun dja kabongun kukku kumekke kunred. Marndi bedmanwali kabirridulkkimankan.\
\\xe Nobody throws rocks, breaks the trees, eats the fruit or drinks the water in that place. Otherwise they would get sick themselves [like the Ancestors who got sick there]. (W)\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\xv Ngandjakdjalarrk marndi kan-lawme. (I)\
\\pde Namanjwarre wardi kan-baye.\
\\xe The crocodile might bite us.\
\\xv Way way way, mandi yi-yakwan la nanjeknjek, nanjeknjek mandi yiyakwan, kayakki kayakki kak, kak, kak kayakki. (I)\
\\pde Way, way, way, wardi yingun la nadjamun, nadjamun wardi yingun, kayakki, kayakki, kak, kak, kak, kayakki.\
\\xe Hey, hey, hey, otherwise you\'92ll be eating something tabooed, it\'92s taboo, don\'92t eat it, no, no, don\'92t do it, no.\cf2 \
\\id DK, MG\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\sy wardi\
\\ur I, E= wardi, warde\
\\so \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 156\
\\dt 03/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx marndingunjngunj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de dugong\
\\sy murnun\
\
\\lx marne\
\\ps applic.\
\\ge BEN\
\\re BENefactive verbal prefix\
\\ng an applicative expressing a beneficiary or maleficiary role\
\\va mene-\
\\de\
\\xv\
\\xe\
\\sd\
\\sy\
\\uv\
\\ur\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\\co\
\
\\lx marne-bebme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de appear before someone\
\
\\lx marne-djare\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de want somebody\
\\xv Ngun-marnedjare ngune-wokdi.\
\\xe She wants to talk to you.\
\\sn 2\
\\de love somebody.\
\
\\lx marne-djirdmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de steal OBJ belonging to someone\
\
\\lx Marnemarneyi\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de place near Kamarrkawan, Rainbow Serpent story place.\
\
\\lx marnenalkbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de cry for a deceased or injured person\
\
\\lx marnemarrkwarremen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re worried for someone\
\\de Become worried for someone.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \\xv Ngaye ngamarnemarrkwarreminj nabinjkunak ngardduk.\
\\xe I was worried for my brother-in-law.\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 254\
\\xv Karndayh bimarnemarrkwarreminj nuye nayaw. 'Baleh wam, nuk kukbengwabom.'\
\\xe Karndayh [the female Antilopine kangaroo] was worried about her child. \'91Where has he gone, he\'92s just wandered off\'92.  \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 132]\
\\dt 12/Sep/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx marnewanj\
\\va marnewanjno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable as a verbal prefix which then becomes a benefactive\
\\sn 1\
\\de private, exclusive possession\
\\xv Mani marnewanj bedberre.\
\\xe That belongs to them (eg. food they have hunted).\
\\xv Njaleken minj kandi-marnewanjnguyinj.\
\\xe Why didn't you mob eat this food of ours we gave you?\
\\sn 2\
\\de private or restricted possession because of ceremonial restriction.\
\\xv Bu kalawuddul ka-bun bonj marnewanj nuye minj na-ngale ka-ngun djal\
dabborrabbolk-wi.\
\\xe If a ceremonial initiate kills [an animal hunting], that's it, it belongs to him by ceremonial restriction, he\
can't give it to anyone except the old people (involved in the ceremony).\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx marnewanjngun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de eat the privately owned food of someone who has given it over\
\\xv Nja dadno kan-marnewanj-ngu.\
\\xe Here, you eat this leg (eg. goose) which belongs to me.\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx marnewokyak\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de 'shut up' for somebody, be in a silence relationship with someone. After seeing certain ceremonies an\
initiate is required for a certain length of time to be silent in the presence of certain kin such as\
classificatory in-laws and cross cousins.\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx marneworrhworr\
\\lc na-/ngal-marne-worrhworr\
\\ps n.\
\\de orphan\
\\sy maladj\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx marneyime\
\\ps\
\\ge\
\\re\
\\sn 1\
\\de tell\
\\xv\
\\xe\
\\sn 2\
\\de call kin X\
\\sd\
\\sy\
\\uv\
\\ur\
\\dt 28/Dec/2007\
\\co\
\
\\lx marninj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de yellow flowering acacia said to attract bees for its nectar\
\\xv Marninj kono man-kung nuye.\
\\xe Its flower belongs to sugarbag.\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =man-yahyay\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx marninj\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fi:Lithomyrtus_sp.\
\\re fi:Lithomyrtus_sp.(plant)\
\\de Sandstone spreading shrub 2-3m high. This plant is fire sensitive and grows in rock country forming extensive groves where  fire has not been able to affect it. Flowers are pink from the start of the wet season (December) through to early dry (May).  There is no agreed\
upon name amongst Bininj for this plant. Sometimes it is referred to as fv:anmirninj,_an-marninj or fv:kun-dulk_ngeyyak 'plant with no name'. fv:(m)an-marninj is usually the name for an Acacia and has been internally borrowed in order to refer to a plant which is not very common.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Lithomyrtus sp. (formerly Myrtella sp.)\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx marangmarang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge red ochre\
\\re ochre red\
\\de kind of red ochre of an orange hue\
\\ee This ochre is lighter in colour than some other named varieties of red ochre.\
\\so Lofty Bardayal Nadjamerrek\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Maranjdji\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Namangnengkererrebe clan estate in Kunibidji area. The site is a mosquito dreaming and there is one sacred palm tree there (Hydriastele ramsayi).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mararradj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Romantic partner, boyfriend/ girlfriend, secret lover.\
\\xv Yiman ngad bininj, nungka wayarra mararradj ka-karrme warridj. \
\\xe Just like people, fv:wayarra spirits have boyfriends/girlfriends too\'92.\
\\dt 12/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx Mararrkiwu\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de An open flat rock expanse on the banks of the so-called \'91Gumardir\'92 River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer River). It is located near the confluence of these two rivers. There is a small shelter not far from the water on the eastern bank which contains extremely ancient rock cupules/petroglyphs and is djang (a Dreaming site). There is an elbow in the river at Mararrkiwu where Bininj (Aboriginal people) camp when visiting this area. Mararrkiwu is on a Bininj manbolh \'91traditional walking track\'92 which traverses the Maburrinj and Kumarrirnbang estates, heading east-northeast from Mararrkiwu to Kurdukadji Dedjbarlkarrhmeng, Kambukkakarung, Yidakdak, Madjanngalkku, Kubakminyawol, Mirurr and Ngalurdbirrhmi.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx marawarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de a malicious spirit that lives in stands of Livistonia palms called fv:djankerle in the Kumadderr region.\
\
\\lx marebu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de pandanus mats used by women as skirts.\
\\xv Berelh, yo marebu birri-barrhburrimeninj yiman ka-yime 'djordben-yak' la nakka\
birri-barrhburrimeninj.\
\\xe They used to cover themselves with pubic coverings and pandanus mats when there were no clothes.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx marebulu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\ge waterlily sp.\
\\re waterlily sp.\
\\re fi:Nymphaea_macrosperma\
\\de Waterlily sp.\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= madjakkalang\
\\sc Nymphaea macrosperma?\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 24/Nov/2013\
\
\\lx Marenja\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djok clan estate on Liverpool River.\
\
\\lx mari\
\\lc kun-mari\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de alcoholic beverages, grog\
\\pde kun-bang\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mari\
\\lc man-mari\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de Cheeky Yam\
\\pde man-yawok.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mari\
\\lc noun class/PRON.mari\
\\ps adj.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de dangerous, angry, wild\
\\pde -bang.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Maridjdjak\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Open savanna plain in the Yanjkobarnem estate. This is just south of the headwaters of the Goomadeer on the escarpment, however the water flows east from here in the direction of Kabulwarnamyo outstation. The outstation is about 26 kilometres to the east.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx marimen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de become angry or wild\
\\xv Yol ka-marimen kan-bonghme.\
\\pde Bininj ka-bangmen kan-bun.\
\\xe The man will get angry and hit us.\
\\pde bangmen.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx marung\
\\lc kun-marung\
\\ps n.\
\\de Mawng language\
\
\\lx marrabbi\
\\va man-marrabbi\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Livistonia_humilis\
\\re sand palm species\
\\de Sand palm. In some dialects, different names are given to small and large specimens. In Kuninjku, the name marrabbi is said to be used by fv:duwa moiety speakers whilst fv:yirridjdja clans are supposed to say fv:djendek or fv:man-djandadj. However in everyday usage these variants can be used interchangeably by anyone.\
\\sc Livistonia humilis\
\\xv Marrabbi an-balabala worrno.\
\\xe The sand palm has flat/wide leaves (as opposed to other fan palms such as fi:Livistona_inermis)\
\\sy man-kurlurrudj, man-djandadj\
\\ur Djnj= an-marrabbi, marrabbi\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx man-marrabbi\
\\va marrabbi\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Livistonia_humilis\
\\re sand palm species\
\\de Sand palm. In some dialects, different names are given to small and large specimens. In Kuninjku, the name marrabbi is said to be used by fv:duwa moiety speakers whilst fv:yirridjdja clans are supposed to say fv:djendek or fv:man-djandadj. However in everyday usage these variants can be used interchangeably by anyone.\
\\sc Livistonia humilis\
\\xv Marrabbi an-balabala worrno.\
\\xe The sand palm has flat/wide leaves (as opposed to other fan palms such as fi:Livistona_inermis)\
\\sy man-kurlurrudj, man-djandadj\
\\ur Djnj= an-marrabbi, marrabbi\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx marrabbi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de sand (fan) palm\
\\xv Marrabbi an-balabala worrno.\
\\xe The sand palm has flat/wide leaves (as opposed to other fan palms such as fi:Livistona_inermis)\
\\sc Livistona humilis\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx marradjiri\
\\ps n.\
\\de exchange ceremony of diplomacy which involves the final presentation of a long decorated ceremonial\
pole. The performers dance for their hosts each evening over a period of weeks to celebrate the rite of\
passage of a young boy. A small lock of the child's hair is held in a small woven bag and this or other\
token is also referred to as the fv:marradjiri or in the case of the fv:mamurrng ceremony the token is\
called the fv:mamurrng.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx marrakkak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de seagull\
\\sc Larus novaehollandiae\
\
\\lx marram\
\\ps n.\
\\ge whistling kite\
\\re whistling kite\
\\re fi:Milvus_sphenurus\
\\de whistling kite\
\\sc Milvus sphenurus\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx marramarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge goose.fan\
\\re goose wing fan\
\\de Fan made from wing of magpie goose or other large water bird.\
\\sy medjek\
\\sd material_culture\
\
\\lx Marranangu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of a Rembarrnga patriclan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx marrangkunj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de plant, as yet unidentified, said to be like cassava.\
\\nt check\
\
\\lx marrawawa\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Frill-necked Lizard\
\\sc Chlamydosaurus kingii\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde danngarr.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx marrawirri\
\\va marrawirriwirri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de spirit which inhabits open bushland.\
\\uv Kun-Djalama lect and possibly Kunbarlang and Ndj\'c8bbana.\
\\xv Marrawirri yiman mimih yerre ka-rohrok la man-berrk kah-di.\
\\xe fv:Marrawirri is just like a fv:mimih spirit but lives in the open bush.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx marrawuddi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sea.eagle\
\\re white-bellied sea eagle\
\\re fi:Haliaeetus_leucogaster\
\\de White-bellied sea eagle.\
\\sc Haliaeetus leucogaster\
\\ee This bird may have different colouring depending on stages of growth. The wedge-tailed eagle, fv:milarrhwaken and this bird fv:mibbarr/djawundu are classed as varieties of the same category of bird (by the Kuninjku).\
\\uv W, Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur I= djawundu, mibbarr\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 29/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx Marraykka\
\\ps prop. n.r\
\\sd mythology\
\\de One of two mermaid sisters or fv:yawkyawk female water spirits. The sister's name is Lukkanaya. An important totemic emblem for the fv:yirridjdja Darnkolo clan in the Tomkinson River district.\
\\xv Marraykka, Lukkanaya kabene-ladme kabene-djuhme yiman djenj kabene-yimerran.\
\\xe When Marraykka and Lukkanaya become hot, they go into the water and become just like fish.\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 30/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx marrbalk\
\\lc man-marrbalk\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de water lily corms\
\\pde 1.burdbarrk, 2. man-dem.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx marre\
\\lc kun-marre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de hair (of head only)\
\\pdn kk = kun-burndih\
\\cf marre-rayek\
\\ce curly hair\
\\cf marre-kuyeng\
\\ce long hair\
\
\\lx marre\
\\ps n. insects\
\\de ant larvae\
\\xv Bodbang ka-rrabungukdeng wanjh marre ka-yimerranj.\
\\xe Green Ants lay eggs which then turn into larvae.\
\
\\lx marredondolem\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\ge fi:Aidia_racemosa\
\\re fi:Aidia_racemosa\
\\de large (5-15m) monsoon vine-forest tree associated with permanent freshwater streams\
\\xv An-marredondolem ku-kabo ka-rri.\
\\xe The fi:Aidia_racemosa plant grows near creeks.\
\\sc Aidia cochinchinensis, Aidia racemosa\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= djirdu, mulunjmulunj\
\\dt 26/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx marre-dordidordi\
\\ps adj.\
\\de dreadlock hair, hair in long matted strands.\
\
\\lx marrek\
\\ps neg. part.\
\\de not, don't\
\\uv Kune\
\\uv KN/KW = minj\
\\xv Marrek birrim-rayi.\
\\xe They didn't come.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx marremdolem\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Cyclophyllum_schultzii\
\\de Spreading shrub or slender tree to 10 m high, generally multi-stemmed. Grows in monsoon forests tree; fruit is a smooth double-lobed thinly-fleshed drupe, about 15 mm across, red when ripe; each lobe has a single seed; fruit available in fv:kudjewk. Turtles also eat the fruits.\
\\sc Cyclophyllum schultzii\
\\sy kun-djadj\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= an-mamrdak\
\\ee red fruit in wet season which is eaten.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx marren\
\\ps v.t. reflex.\
\\de marry\
\\xv Ngayi Balang ngane-marrinj.\
\\xe Balang and I got married.\
\
\\lx man-marrewahwa\
\\ps n.\
\\re Leichhardt tree\
\\re fi:Nauclea_orientalis\
\\de Leichhardt tree; partly deciduous large tree to 25 m high with horizontal branching and dense crown. Suitable for dugout canoes and sculpted artworks. Edible but bitter fruit is eaten fv:kunumeleng season.\
\\sc Nauclea orientalis\
\\uv W\
\\ur Kdj= an-marrewahwah, an-kunkun, I= man-njalbbuwa, E= man-wurrbula\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx man-marrewahwa\
\\ps n.\
\\re Leichhardt tree\
\\re fi:Nauclea_orientalis\
\\de Leichhardt tree; partly deciduous large tree to 25 m high with horizontal branching and dense crown. Suitable for dugout canoes and sculpted artworks. Edible but bitter fruit is eaten fv:kunumeleng season.\
\\sc Nauclea orientalis\
\
\\lx marrewedowen\
\\va -marrewe\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be hungry\
\\xv Nga-marrewedowen.\
\\xe I'm hungry.\
\
\\lx Marrirn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of several fi:yirridjdja moiety Kunwinjku and Kuninjku-speaking patriclans. The main Marrirn group is associated with Kumarrirnbang region; a second is located on the Liverpool River estate; a third is associated with an estate near Kakodbebuldi outstation, Mann River and the fourth is known as fv:Nabiwo_Marrirn after the matrimoiety phratry affiliation of the last traditional owner of this estate, a man named Naburlurl or Nabunbu of fv:na-Kamarrang subsection.\
\\xv Kure Bangardi ba-ruy Kordoberr. Na-Marrirn, ruy man-wurrk.\
\\xe Bangardi was burnt at Kordoberr. A Marrirn clansman, he was burnt in a [kangaroo] fire drive.\
\\xv Wanjh kumekke ka-bolkburnbun, Dird Marrirn Nadjarrawo nakka Marrirn na-djangmarrirn, kaddum djarreh djal Marrirn munguyh... yi-djalay.\
\\xe That site, the moon dreaming is the last Marrirn place after the whirlwind dreaming in Marrirn estate, but upstream [on another watercourse] it's Marrirn all the way... you keep going for a long way [and it's still Marrirn territory].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx Marriyalayala\
\\ps n.\
\\ge group.name\
\\re clan aggregate name\
\\de clan aggregate name for the people who live in the Cooper Creek area north of Gunbalanya.\
\\xv Marriyalayala, Kubidbu, nuye Kodjok Namandjulngunj nuye.\
\\xe The clan aggregate name Marriyalayala [includes the place] Kubidbu and it belongs to Kodjok of the Mandjulngunj clan.\
\\dt 21/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx marrkidjbu\
\\ps n.\
\\de man with special supernatural power\
\\sy na-kordang, marrngkidj\
\
\\lx marrkinj [NEEDS EDITING]\
\\ps n.\
\\de news messenger, person with a message to tell someone\
\\xv None alenge an-berlmangi kan-marrkinjmangi wanjh an-kung ba-bengkani.\
\\xe That None honey spirit would come with a message for us because she knew about the honey [the\
place tofind it].\
\\xv Marrkinj wam ka-benmulewan.\
\\xe He has gone to tell someone about what they did.\
\\xv Kan-djahwon marrkinj-ken? Larrk, ngam-djal-wam.\
\\xe Have you come here to tell us about some news? No, I've just come here [for no reason].\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx marrkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge believe\
\\re believe someone\
\\de believe what someone says\
\\xv Njale-ken yi-marrkmang, ka-kurren nakkan, ngun-wurrhke.\
\\xe Why do you believe him, he's lying, deceiving you.\
\
\\lx Marrkolidjban\
\\ps place name\
\\sd placename\
\\de Homeland Centre in na-born/na-miri clan country. This is a large district name or fv:kun-ngey-badjan.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Marrku\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan on the southern Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Nakka nga-buyikahme na-marrku na-yikbulanj nani nawu lorrkkon ka-lorrkkonyo ka-rri djarrbirn\
nga-lorrkkonkurrmeng. Nani walem nawu ku-rralk lorrkkon kondanj an-wanjdjad.\
\\xe I'll change the person I'm referring to now, a Marrku clansman, he was na-Bulanj subsection he's there in that hollow log coffin with\
the carved spikes on the top, a hollow log coffin I placed there. It's there to the south in the grass here [near that] little creek.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx marrmarrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.happy\
\\re be happy\
\\de Be happy.\
\\se marrmarrni\
\\de Be happy.\
\\dt 23/Apr/2014\
\
\cf2 \\lx marrmarrmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re become happy\
\\de to become happy, to cheer up, to get excited\
\\xv Benewam benebom nawern ngarrbek, kalawan dja mak nabubuyika mayh. Ngahli daluk Ngalyangdoh marrmarrminj. \
\\xe They went and caught lots of echidnas, goannas and other kinds of animals. That woman Ngalyangdoh was very happy. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 244\
\\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx marrmo\
\\ps n.\
\\de clan home, place of residence or where you come from, the place of one's origins and clan estate\
\\xv "Kan-bawon," na-kohbanj nabe "nga-djaledjale," nungan kun-red marrmo.\
\\xe "You leave me here" says the old man," I'll just do whatever," at his homeland country [he said].\
\
\\lx marrmo\
\\lc ku-marrmo\
\\ps loc.\
\\de at one's home or true clan country, at the place where one belongs or is living\
\\xv Nga-rrurndeng ku-marrmo.\
\\xe I'll go back to my country.\
\
\\lx marrmo\
\\lc na-/ngal-marrmo\
\\ps n.\
\\de ?\
\\xv Na-marrmo nani wardi kan-bawon.\
\\xe This man is serious person [he has a purposeful disposition], he wants to just go off to his home and\
leave us [so let's not get in his way].\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx marrngalahme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de hear\
\\sn 2\
\\de understand\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde 1. bekkan 2. bengkan.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx marrngkidj\
\\ps n.\
\\de magical power\
\\xv Na-kordang nawu marrngkidj ka-karrme, ka-rrolkan ka-re.\
\\xe The clever men who have magical powers can rise up into the air and travel.\
\
\\lx Marrngunj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate north of fv:Yikarrakkal. This site includes significant rock art shelters\
including those photographed by the explorer Herbert Basedow in 1927.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx marrngunj\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Neoarius_ater\
\\de Eel-tailed catfishes but only smaller specimens. The name fv:bikurr refers to larger specimens.\
\\sc Neoarius ater\
\\pdn kk = nakeryi\
\\ee REM = baridjarr\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx marrumarru\
\\lc +PREFmarrumarru\
\\ps n.\
\\de one who engages in repetitive action, eg. going and coming back continually\
\\cf djekmi-marrumarru\
\\ce someone who is always laughing\
\\cf PREF+bodme-marrumarru\
\\ce someone who sits doing the same thing for a long time.\
\\xv Ngal-bodmemarrumarru, ka-djal-borolhme kun-yarl.\
\\xe She's continually sitting there spinning string.\
\
\\lx marrunj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge palm.sp.\
\\re palm tree\
\\re fi:Hydriastele_ramsayi\
\\de Palm sp. The growth apex is cut out and eaten as 'cabbage'. Water containers are made from the basal sheaths of old fronds. Leaves of young plants may be eaten raw.\
\\sc Hydriastele ramsayi\
\\ur I= kolng\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 23/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx marrwe\
\\lc kun-marrwe\
\\ps n.\
\\de hunger\
\
\\lx marrwe\
\\va marrwedowen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be hungry\
\\pdn kk = marrwulngayirrihme\
\
\\lx marrwulngayirrihme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de be hungry\
\\pde marrwedowen\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mawah\
\\ps n.\
\\de kun-derbi, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent in-law?? (eg. Bulanj to\
Balang or Belinj), hearer calls referent fv:mawa or daughter's child (Kalidjan to Balang/Belinj).\
\\cn ngarduk mawa.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mawah\
\\va mawa\
\\ps n.\
\\de A kin term which means different things across the Bininj Kunwok dialect chain. In most dialects: 1. father's father and that person's siblings 2. a man's son's child 3. a woman's brother's son's child. Parallel patrilineal grandkin might be another way of saying this. Some Kundjeyhmi speakers call their mother's mother's brother fv:mawah and speakers of Mayali at Manyallaluk don't use the term fv:mawah at all but rather all parallel grandkin (father's father, father's father's sister, mother's mother, mother's mother's brother) are called fv:kakkak.\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 07/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx Mawarndje\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A billabong on the road which runs southwest from Mamardawerre outstation along the west side of the Goomadeer River. The billabong is south of Kanankadjbel crossing, about 5km from the outstation and and is a good place for catching wakih (freshwater prawns).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx mawo\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Grass species, common in most woodland areas.\
\\uv I\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 07/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx Mawuddja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place name in a Djindibi clan estate near Kuborlomborlom.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 07/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx mawudme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hop (certain macropod species specific only), of male Antilopine wallaroo only ( male Macropus\
antilopinus).\
\\xv Ngurri-na nani karndakidj ka-mawudme.\
\\xe Look there he is that Antilopine kangaroo hopping away.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mawul\
\\lc kun-mawul\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd weather\
\\de wind\
\\xv Kun-mawul ka-murridjke man-bende.\
\\pde Kun-kurra ka-bakke man-bedje.\
\\xe The wind is knocking down the spear grass.\
\\pde kun-kurra\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mawunkurdda\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de barramundi fingerling\
\\uv Kun-djalama lect or possibly Ndj\'e9bbana loan\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Mawurrk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de regional name for part of the Tomkinson River flood plain in Gurrgone country below the Djinkarr Ranger Station south of\
Maningrida\
\\ee Mawurrk is a Bininj Kunwok name for a larger variety of Melaleuca_viridiflora\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx mawurrk\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.sp.\
\\re fi:Mealeuca_viridiflora\
\\re broad leaved paperbark\
\\re paperbark species\
\\de broad leaved paperbark\
\\sc Melaleuca viridiflora\
\\cf mabbarra\
\\ce small variety of fi:Melaleuca_viridiflora\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx mawurrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge IV-place.name\
\\re language variety name\
\\de name recorded by patrol officer Syd Kyle-Little in 1949 for the  name of the language variety spoken by people at Mawurrk on the\
Tomkinson River flood plain. This name is now considered archaic, and it is not clear if Kun-mawurrk is another name for Kuninjku.\
Kyle-Little records the place where this name was collected as Kunbad Karri, a traditional fishing camp in the Mimanjarr district,\
Tomkinson River. Mawurrk is east of Kunbad Karri.\
\\bb Kyle-Little (1957: 214):\
\\dt 08/May/2007\
\
\\lx mawurrumbulk\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge icthycide\
\\re fish poison plant\
\\re icthycide\
\\de generic term for plants which can be used as ichthycides\
\\xv Wolewoleh Kodjdjan mawurrumbulk mey. Ngarri-madbom, weleng djorndoy. Kumekkebeh\
kolhbom ngani-nahnang djenj doweng kodjkang.\
\\xe Yesterday Kodjdjan collected branches for fish-poison. We waited while she pounded the leaves. Then\
she threw the poison branches in the water while we watched the fish floating drunk to the surface.\
\\xv Mawurrumbulk kabi-bun ka-dowen.\
\\xe Fish poison plants kill (the fish) and it dies.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re Cajanus acutifolia\
\\re Distichostemon hispidulum\
\\de fi:Cajanus_acutifolia and fi:Distichostemon_hispidulum are both referred to by the proper name fv:mawurrumbulk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mawurrumbulk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de generic name for plants which can be used as an ichthycide. An exception is the plant fv:Cajanus sp. which although called\
fv:mawurrumbulk is not used for fish poison because it is not effective.\
\\sn 2\
\\de kind of plant used as an ichthycide\
\\sc e.g. Cajanus acutifolia, Distichostemon hispidulum\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mayahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de become lost, confused, dazed\
\\xv Karri-nang kandi-bawong ka-mayahmayahme........\
\\xe We all saw you left us and (now) he's lost, doesn't know what's happening. (?) (Words of\
fv:wurrurrumi song).\
\\sn 2\
\\de be ignorant, unaware\
\\xv Balanda kabirri-nan kabirri-yime "oh good colour" la kabirri-mayahme na-djamun\
kah-di.\
\\xe Non-aboriginal people look (at a bark painting design) and they say "Oh good colour" but they're not\
aware that there is a sacred/secret meaning there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mayala\
\\ps n.\
\\de a card game term meaning 'a hand of no value', 'nothing'.\
\\xv Njale yi-karrme? Ngayi mayala.\
\\xe What have you got? I've got nothing.\
\
\\lx Mayali\
\\ps n.\
\\de language name used by some speakers as a name for their own particular dialect of Kunwinjku eg.\
speakers from Beswick, Barunga, Bulman area. Some speakers use this term to cover all dialects.\
Western Kunwinjku speakers (eg. those at Kunbarlanja) do not use this term as a dialect or language\
name but rather as a word meaning 'thought' or 'idea'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mayali\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge thought\
\\re thought\
\\re mind\
\\re idea\
\\re intention\
\\sn 1\
\\de idea, knowledge\
\\xv Nanih kukbele ngaban-bukkan nawu kure ngarrku djang bedda ngandi-marneyimeng Bulanj nawu na-Kardbam nawu\
kun-wok ka-bakke kun-mayali mey yiman ngad Bininj karri-wokdi.\
\\xe This white man here, I'm showing them the dreaming of ours, they have been discussing it, this man of Bulanj subsection and Kardbam\
clan, who speaks the language fluently and talks as we Aboriginal people talk.\
\\xv Yika ngarri-re kun-warddebim ngarri-nan kun-mayali wanjh ngarri-mang.\
\\xe Sometimes we go and look at rock art and then we get ideas [inspirations for our own paintings] from that.\
\\xv Konda Wakkewakken maitbi ka-ni ba-yimeng. Marrek nga-bengkan nga-wakwan, bad minjbi ngayeman mayali\
nga-djalyime. Mayali nga-marnewalebengkan.\
\\xe Maybe the Wakkewakken spirit is here in this area, he used to say. I don't know, but I'm just talking about my own ideas about it. I\
have my own knowledge/insights about its meaning.\
\\sn 2\
\\de intention\
\\xv Birri-mayaliborledkeng.\
\\xe They changed their minds.\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx mayalibayhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge make.aware\
\\re realise\
\\re enlighten (the mind)\
\\de cause someone to realise something; enlighten someone in relation to an idea, knowledge or thought\
\\xv Kan-mayalibayhkeng.\
\\xe She enlightened us.\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx mayaliborledke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge change.mind\
\\re change mind\
\\de change one's mind\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\\co\
\
\\lx mayamaya\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of grass\
\\xv Nin kangun mayamaya.\
\\xe The double-barred finch eats (the seeds of) fv:mayamaya.\
\\sc Panicum tricoides\
\
\\lx Mayarram\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a coastal Iwaidja patriclan \
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx mayawurlhwurl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Gould's Sand Monitor\
\\sn 2\
\\de generic term for all goannas.\
\\sc Varanus gouldii\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kalawan\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mayadjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re sweet cane grass\
\\re grass that has sweet juice\
\\re bush sugar cane\
\\re fi:Heteropogon_triticeus\
\\de bush sugar cane\
\\sc Heteropogon triticeus\
\\ee The name fv:mayadjdja can sometimes be used as a generic for grasses that can be chewed to extract a sweet juice. Sometimes the grass fi:Mneusithea_roltboellioides is also referred to as fv:mayadjdja but it is more properly called fv:morrongomolo. Some speakers say that fv:mayadjdja is sweet grass that has ripened and has plenty of juice whilst younger grass without much juice is called fv:djilidjilih.\
\\sd plant\
\\p mayedjdja.jpg\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx maydbi\
\\va madjbi, mayhbi\
\\re might be\
\\de Perhaps, maybe, \'93might be\'94, \cf2 who knows (the speaker is not sure or doesn't know).\
\\xv Konda Wakkewakken maydbi ka-ni bayimeng.\
\\xe \'93Maybe the Wakkewakken spirit is here in this area\'94, he said.\
\\sy nuk\
\\bw from English \'91might be\'92\
\\id DK\
\\dt 30/Jul/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx Mayebe\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area of open savanna bushland in the Maburrinj estate close to where the Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer) flows off the Djalbangurrk estate escarpment southeast of its confluence with the Goomadeer. This was previously an area where people would make bark shelters.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx mayemurre\
\\pr kane-djarrk-\
\\ge kun-debi.term\
\\re kun-debi term\
\\de kun-debi term, you are my brother, my fv:kakkak, your sister.\
\\xv A: Kane-djarrkmayemurre kamh-re. B: Yo ngalekke kane-djarrkmayemurre.\
\\xe [Brother], here comes the one who is my mother's mother's brother and your sister. B: Yes, here [brother] is the one who is my sister and your mother's mother's brother.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\dt 05/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx Mayengarr\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A valley in the Djurlka estate, on a Bininj manbolh (traditional walking route) from Kudjekbinj to Gunbalanya. Missionaries from Gunbalanya also used this track, taking their horse up this valley on expeditions to the west. The valley is southwest of the waterfall at Djurlka and leads up onto the plateau from the Goomadeer River valley.\
\\xv Ngayahwurdni dabbarrabbolk ngandimarneyimeng Mayengarr birribidbuni djarrang, manbarrarn manu.\uc0\u8232 \\xe When I was small, the old people told me that they used to ride horses up through that gorge at Mayengarr.\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx mayh\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de any animal 2. rainbow serpent 3. ceremony (refers normally in ceremonial context to either\
the Duwa or Yirridjdja major regional cermonial complexes) 4. a snake\
\\xv Mayh wam.\
\\xe He's gone hunting.\
\\xv mayh-mak/ mayh-warre\
\\xe good hunter/ no good at hunting\
\\xv Mayh ka-wokdi Mimarn.\
\\xe There will be a ceremony at Mimarn (this location for example implies a duwa ceremony).\
\\xv Bulanj, yidok mayh yi-melmeng?\
\\xe Bulanj, did you stand on a snake?\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx mayhdedj\
\\pr man-\
\\va mayhdedj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Arum.sp.\
\\re Arum plant\
\\re fi:Amorphophallus_galbra\
\\de kind of herbaceous plant of the Arum family with a subterranean tuber which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is\
rendered edible\
\\sc Amorphophallus galbra\
\\sy walangari\
\\uv Kun-walidjaw duwa moiety clan lect\
\\ur I= djedbarlh (yirridjdja moiety name) \
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx mayhdenge\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Triumfetta rhomboidea\
\
\\lx mayhdjoleng\
\\ps n.\
\\de meat that is cooked\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mayhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de produce a sudden flash of light (used to refer to na-marrkon, lightning man)\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mayhmakmen\
\\ps n.\
\\re good hunter (become)\
\\de Become a good hunter, develop good hunting skills.\
\cf2 \\xv Wanjh nunganwali wurdyaw kamayhmakmen kadjalre nawu kambun mayh. Kaluk minj bidlarrk kamdurndeng.\
\\xe The child in turn will become a good hunter, he just goes and gets an animal, and he never comes back empty handed.\
\\dt 12/Sep/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx mayhmayh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de little birds, generic\
\
\\lx mayhyaw\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de little bird\
\
\\lx mayikmud\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\va mayikmud\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re fi:Scleria_lingulata\
\\re fi:Lycopodium_cernuum\
\\de kind of grass-\
\\xv An-mayikmud djurrno ka-karrme kan-dadje. Kunj nganabbarru marrek kangun an-djurrbang.\
\\xe The fv:an-mayikmud grass has a sharp blade that can cut you. Kangaroos and buffaloes don't eat it because of the dangerous sharp edge.\
\\sc Scleria lingulata, Lycopodium cernuum\
\\uv Djnj= an-mayikmud, I, E= mayikmud\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx Mayirrku\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Mayirrku is a gorge on the east side of the Goomadeer river valley, beginning just east of the river. It is about 11km southwest of Mamardawerre outstation and northwest of the Kabbari complex. This was on a traditional walking track which allowed east-west travel through the scarp of the Goomadeer River valley. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Mayirrkulidj\
\\va Mayirrulidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of two patriclans; one, a Kunwinjku patriclan in the upper Goomadeer (fv:Kumadderr) River district and the other a Mawng clan\
(pronounced fv:Mayirrulidj) in the Wellington Range coastal region of north-west Arnhem Land\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx Mayirrulidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de a variant pronunciation (usually by Mawng or Iwaidja speakers) of the Kunwinjku patriclan fv:Mayirrkulidj\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx Mayong\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area in the lowland part of the Djurlka estate east of the Goomadeer River, a traditional camping place.  \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx mayorrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wind\
\\re wind\
\\de generic name for wind\
\\xv Manbu kun-rorre kah-karrkini Uranium, kabirri-djuhke ba bu minj kun-djulng ka-marnburren wardi kun-mayorrk kam-re wanjh ka-djulngdolkayhwe.\
\\xe When there is ground that contains uranium [from the mining process], they will sprinkle the ground with water to stop [contaminated] dust being taken up by the wind.\
\\sy kun-kurra\
\
\\lx me\
\\lc man-me\
\\ps n.\
\\de food\
\\pdn kk = man-worrh\
\
\\lx med\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge wait\
\\re not yet\
\\re wait\
\\de wait, not yet, 'hang on a bit'\
\\xv Med yi-rrin, warde ngun-nan kornobolo.\
\\xe Hang on, wait, otherwise the wallaby will see you.\
\\sy manjh\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx meddan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge turn head\
\\re turn.head, turn around\
\\de Look around, turn head to one side.\
\\uv M, W\
\\xv Yi-medda gan-na gonda.\
\\xe Look around and look at me.\
\\xv Yimarnek meddanj kure birri-bom, kure meddanj birri-bom, kure meddanj kure kune ka-meddan kune ka-yime la kune yimeng la kubolkyimeng.\
\\xe Whenever he would turn his head, they hit him, when he turned his head the other way they hit him, this way and that way and they kept hitting him.\
\\dt 29/Apr/2014\
\
\
\\lx medjek\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de goose wing fan\
\\sn 2\
\\de feathers\
\\sn 3\
\\de lateral fins on fish\
\\xv Medjek yi-ma kan-bubuhme.\
\\xe Get the feather fan and fan me.\
\
\\lx mehme\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Most larger quails eg. stubble quail, brown quail, and chestnut-backed button-quail.\
\\ee Because of the number of different quail species and their somewhat similar appearance, names for quails are often not consistent from one speaker to another within the same dialect and there is also considerable difference in quail names across dialects. For example in some dialects (e.g. Djnj) the brown quail is known as fv:djiribbidj but in other dialects this name is considered a synonym for a group of quail species designated by the name fv:mehme.\
\\sc Coturnix pectoralis, Coturnix ypsilophora, Turnix castanota\
\\xv "Ngayi Mehme kondanj, konda ngah-ni ku-kurlk." Wanjh wam Mehme ngalbu ku-kurlk.\
Mehme bukka Mehme ngal-yahwurd djiribbidj djiribbidj ngalbu. Yoh.\
\\xe "I am Mehme here, here I stay on the ground." Then Mehme went away, the one who lives on the ground. That Mehme, the little one, she's also called fv:djiribbidj.\
\\sy djiribbidj fs:'brown_quail'\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= merhmerh\
\\ur W, Kdj= djirndih, Djnj= wulamerrh\
\\sd bird \
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx -mekke\
\\agr na-mekke, ngalekke, manekke, kunekke\
\\ps dem.\
\\ge DEM\
\\de this one, that one\
\
\\lx Mekruy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place on Tomkinson River flood plain in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx melengerrk\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Cynanchum_pedunculatum\
\\de Plant with small edible radish-like tuber.\
\\sc Cynanchum pedunculatum\
\\uv E\
\\ur Djnj, Kdj= an-ngelemerrk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/May/2014\
\
\\lx Melerrerrebbi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\re place name\
\\de Place in the Mumeka estate which is visited in order to collect a vine fi:Trophis_scandens called fv:milirl in Kuninjku. The vine is used to make conical fish traps fv:mandjabu and large collection baskets.\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx Meleyengkobarnrungi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Marebu djang (women\'92s triangular mat Dreaming) in the Kabbari site complex, the focus of which is a cliff face with a vast white stain on it. This is visible from Kunyikuymi. The sandy river bed below is also included.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Melkmelk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name\
\\de the fi:yikurrumu ritualistic names for the Liverpool River Djok clan\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Melmarra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name\
\\de the fi:yikurrumu ritualistic name for the Kulmarru clan\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx melme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de kick or stand on something, touch with foot. 2. A dance style of men's foot stomping mimih\
dancing.\
\\xv And nungka rerre yiman mimih kah-melme mak ya man-karre and bedda rerre\
birri-yolyolmeng and dabborrabbolk and bindi-marne-yimeng ngurri-melmen yiman\
karri-melme and mimih melmehmelmeng ya.\
\\xe People did it after in the same way mimih dance (by stomping their feet) and also songs and stories\
which were told to the old people/ancestors and they told them to dance just like we dance and the\
mimih used to dance yes.\
\\sn 3\
\\de To call someone a kinship term.\
\\xv Ngaleng korlonj ngun-melme.\
\\xe She calls you 'son'.\
\\pdn kk = 1.darrkarrhme 2. dalhbonghme (to kick)\
\\cf Kun-djang melmeng.\
\\ce He stood poised to spear.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx melworn\
\\lc kun-melworn\
\\ps n.\
\\de place, country\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-bolk.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx men\
\\lc kun-men\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de knowledge\
\\xv Minj ngarri-mendjorrmayi.\
\\xe We haven't gained that knowledge yet.\
\\sn 2\
\\de shape of the body\
\\xv Ngurri-menna! Nakka bininj.\
\\xe Look at his body. That's the man!\
\
\\lx mendi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de have knowledge\
\\xv Ngudda yi-mendi, korroko yi-borlhmeng.\
\\xe You know about it all, you've already learned it.\
\\xv Ngudda yi-mendi yi-kanem!\
\\xe Hey have you got any manners, don't you know, listen to me!\
\
\\lx menmakmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de receive a sensation telepathically, feel a sensation (eg. goose bumps or an auspicious change in\
physical perception) which forebodes or tells of the contemporaneous occurrence of another event such\
as the arrival of a person, the death of someone, the mentioning of one's name or the approach of an\
enemy or someone disliked.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx menmenbengkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de be knowledgable, have knowledge about a certain topic\
\
\\lx menmenno\
\\ps n.\
\\de all kinds of knowledge especially traditional knowledge which has esoteric elements to it.\
\
\\lx mennan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de know an idea or concept\
\
\\lx Mengerrdji\
\\ps n.\
\\de language name, originally spoken in the area on which Oenpelli is now situated.\
\\xv Mengerrdji birrih-ni kun-red Kunbarlanja.\
\\xe Mengerrdji people used to be at Oenpelli.\
\
\\lx Merdder\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx merlbbe\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de female agile wallaby\
\\sc Macropus agilis\
\\pdn kk = njamdjorrhdjorrh\
\
\\lx merlem\
\\pr ka-\
\\lc ka-merlem\
\\ps n. pred.\
\\ge pregnant\
\\re be pregnant\
\\de pregnant\
\\cf kun-merlem\
\\ce belly\
\\xv Ka-merlem yaw dorreng.\
\\xe She's pregnant (with a child).\
\\sy ka-rrulmuk, ka-yawkan\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx merlem\
\\pr kun-\
\\va merlemno\
\\lc kun-merlem\
\\ps n.\
\\ge belly\
\\re belly\
\\de outer 'belly'\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx merlem\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\va merlemno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge internode\
\\re internode (on bamboo stem)\
\\de internode on bamboo stem\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx merlembok\
\\pr kun-\
\\va merlembokno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge belly.track\
\\re belly track\
\\re snake track\
\\de track left by certain reptiles, especially snakes and crocodiles\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\sy ka-barlahyo\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx merlemdulmuk\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps adj.\
\\mr merlem 'belly'+ dulmuk 'heavy'\
\\ge pregnant\
\\re pregnant\
\\de be pregnant, especially in the later stages of pregnancy\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx merlemdjalkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr merlem 'belly', djalkmang 'cut'\
\\ge cut.belly\
\\re cut open belly\
\\de cut open the belly\
\\xv Bene-merlemdjalkmey wanjh kun-mo bene-mey kun-mo-ngarre bene-merlemdjalkmey wanjh bene-ngukdjalkmey wanjh\
kureh bene-njamed, bene-mo-mey. \
\\xe They both cut open the belly and they got out the bones, her bones. They cut open the belly and then cut up the guts and then they\
whatsit, got the bones out.\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx merlemerle\
\\ps n.\
\\ge butterfly\
\\re butterfly\
\\de generic term for all butterflies\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx merlemerleh\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Zornia.nervata\
\\re fi:Zornia_nervata\
\\de kind of slender prostrate herb with yellow pea-like flowers, grows in the sandstone country\
\\sc Zornia nervata\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 26/Aug/2007\
\
\cf2 \\lx merlemmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re pregnant (become)\
\\de Become pregnant, conceive.\
\\xv Bu morlehmorlenj kabirriwurlebme kumekke kunred, wanjh kabirrimerlemmen, kabirriyawmang bokenh wurdyaw.' Lumaluma bimarneyimeng.\
\\xv \'93If women swim at that place, they will become pregnant, they will give birth to twins\'94, said Lumaluma. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997\
\\id DK\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx mernengel\
\\ps n.\
\\ge mosquito\
\\re mosquito (fi:kun-kurrng register)\
\\de mosquito\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde birndu\
\\sd insects\
\\ee Burarra= 'an-genamernenga'\
\\cf Burarra fi:an-genamernenga\
\\ce mosquito\
\\dt 29/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Mernerle\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate in fv:Mimarlarr area.\
\\nt check fv:mirnele?\
\
\\lx merhmerh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Most larger quails eg. stubble quail, brown quail, and chestnut-backed button-quail.\
\\sc Coturnix pectoralis, Coturnix ypsilophora, Turnix castanota\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= mehme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx merre\
\\lc kun-merre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de lungs\
\\sy kun-wobe, djoyikno (check)\
\
\\lx merrembi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de shrub with leaves that are used as ichthycides\
\\xv Merrembi arrimang djenj arrikolhbun ka-rrowen.\
\\xe We use the fv:Tephrosia leaves to kill fish.\
\\xv Merrembi ka-djarnabebme ka-djarnangun ka-rrowen djenj.\
\\xe The fv:Tephrosia sp. has soapy suds which come out and when fish imbibe them, they die.\
\\sc Tephrosia sp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Mewkruy\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Darnkorlo clan estate next to Yibidbalama on Tomkinson River flood plain.\
\
\\lx mewor\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de swamp spike rush\
\\sc Eleocharis dulcis\
\\ee This plant is associated with the rainbow serpent. Anchor Kulunba:"Bi-bodmerrulebom ngalyod." The\
plant pierced the back of the rainbow serpent."\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mi-\
\\ps clitic\
\\de inside, locative 'in'\
\\xv Manih man-kung nga-ngalkeng kure mi-kambe.\
\\xe I found this wild honey in an ant mound.\
\\xv Ngayi kuberrk nga-yo, minj nga-djare mi-kurrambalk.\
\\xe I'm going to sleep outside, I don't like being inside houses.\
\\xv Mi-ngarre\
\\xe In the vine forest.\
\\xv Mi-kurladjdjakel ka-yo djaddi.\
\\xe Frogs lie in the sedge grass (fv:Eliocharis dulcis).\
\\xv mi-kurrurla\
\\xe in the sea.\
\
\\lx Mibalmed\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place on the western side of the Liverpool River in country jointly owned by fv:Born and fv:Kurnumbidj clans 'on the south end of fv:Midjuyh billabong' (Altman 1985).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Mibarlwarra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place on Liverpool River in the Kunburray estate approximately seven kilometers from Manmoyi community. This is a starting point for canoe trips to the Cuthbertson Falls district. Mibarlwarra can be reached by walking from Mokmek via Nayinin and Nakorlk Kayo. A Wubarr ceremony place is located just to the west at Anlolorr.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mibbarr\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sea.eagle\
\\re white-bellied sea eagle\
\\re eagle, white-bellied\
\\de White-bellied sea eagle.\
\\xv Mibbarr, djang Kurnumbidj dja Kulmarru bedberre.\
\\xe The white-bellied sea eagle is a totem for people in the Kunumbidj and Kulmarru clans.\
\\sc Haliacetus leucogaster\
\\sy djawundu\
\\uv E= damala, Kdj= marrawuddi, Rembarrnga= makaka\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mibelk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de swamp and plain country in Kumarrirnbang estate. Good seasonal fishing site.\
\
\\lx Mibibiburdu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place name in Waybburda estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Mibindarang\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre-Kubumi estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Mibinenged\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de Site on an upper branch of Mandedjkadjang Creek (Muralidbar Creek) in the Kunukdi estate. It is in the very upper reaches of the creek, only around 12km east of the Goomadeer River at the Kabbari complex. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Mibirlahbirlang\
\\va Mibirlanghbirlang\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate. Literally 'in the grove of fi:Sterculia_quadrifida trees.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Mibudyibudyi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mibudbud\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate. Literally 'in the red flowered kurrajong grove'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Mibulu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate on the Mann River between fv:Mumeka and fv:Kakodbebuldi\
Homeland Centres.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Miburningalk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\uc0\u8232 \\de Savanna area on upper Mandedjkadjung Creek (Muralidbar Creek), around 7km east-southeast of Demed hill. On either side of the creek the lush green Melaleuca forest gives way to dry sparse eucalypt bush with gibber hills and slopes. Downstream is Nararra Kadjabdi and the creek enters the escarpment area which takes it eventually past Mandedjkadjang outstation. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Miburr Karndjalk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx midbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de mistake the identity of somebody, not recognise,\
\\xv fv:Hat yi-djongburren la ngandi-midbun.\
\\xe Put a hat on and they won't recognise us.\
\
\\lx middurru\
\\ps n. insects\
\\de tick, larger than fv:djarniman\
\\cf see fv:djarniman.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Midudjmi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Midjadukdorrk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate near Mann River.\
\
\\lx midjadje\
\\ps n.\
\\de dance style associated with dilly bags, often seen performed by women during funeral ceremonies.\
\\xv Midjadje kun-madj-ken kabirri-borrkke.\
\\xe fv:Midjadje is a dance representing the dilly bag.\
\
\\lx midjakkorr\
\\va midjakkurr\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge bangle\
\\re string bangle\
\\re bangle made from vine.\
\\de Bangle made from vine of fi:Flagellaria_indica\
\\sd material culture\
\\sn 2\
\\re fi:Flagellaria_indica\
\\re vine that grows in jungle thickets\
\\de Bangle vine; slender vigorous climber with cane like stems, supported by coiled leaf tip tendrils, used for making armbands and sewing together the ends of bark canoes. Also used for making fish traps (to attach ribbing to the woven body) and in recent times for the frames of pandanus sculptures for the art market.\
\\sc Flagellaria indica\
\\sy an-rong, karrawukka\
\\uv Kdj, W\
\\ur I= man-barddedde, Djnj= barddedde, W= karrawukka\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 16/Feb/2014\
\
\\lx Midjakkorr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\re place name\
\\de Place name on the Liverpool River in the Ankung Djang estate near Kabulwarnamyo on the road to Kundjorlomdjorlom. A rock shelter there has many engravings or long abraded grooves said to be the long fingers of honey spirit beings which represent the long entrance tubes to honey hives.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 01/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx Midjalabarre\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate, rocky outcrops.\
\
\\lx Midjarndadj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx midjbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de not recognise someone\
\\xv Nganabbarru kaben-midjbun Balanda la ngad bininj kan-bengkan ngadberre.\
\\xe Buffaloes don't recognise white people but we Aboriginal people, they know us.\
\
\\lx midjdjarn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de exchange ceremony of the Kunbarlang and K\uc0\u729 nibidji.\
\
\\lx Midjeddam\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de monsoon vine thicket in fv:Kunanganja clan estate near the Liverpool River visited for flying fox\
hunting.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Midjibirri\
\\ps n place name\
\\de a synonym for the place called fv:Kakunidjdji.\
\
\\lx midjiked\
\\ps n.\
\\de mosquito net\
\
\\lx Midjirrmidjirr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djorrorlam clan estate.\
\
\\lx midjno\
\\ps n.\
\\de burrow or hole belonging to burrowing animals such as goannas.\
\\xv Yi-bengkan ka-ngimen gu-midj wanjh gurebeh gam-dudjerren, yimad ngad\
ngarri-dangbalhmen 'door'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx midju\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de banksia flower cone\
\\sc Banksia dentata\
\\xv Midju ngarri-karlkid-bongun man-kung.\
\\xe We drink the nectar of the honey in the Banksia flower cone.\
\\xv Kun-kare birri-kinjeng midju wanjh bindi-kinjemeninj ku-kodj yiman 'djekdjen'\
(injection).\
\\xe A long time ago they used to burn the banksia cones and place them against the head like an injection.\
\\uv W=kuybuk\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Midjuyh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Marrkolidjban landing on Liverpool River.\
\
\\lx Mikaddi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djok clan estate in Mann River district.\
\
\\lx Mikardidj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx mikambe\
\\va kambe\
\\ps n. ('mi-' is locative)\
\\de in red antbed\
\\xv "Yim-ray nga-ngalkeng man-kung, nanih modjarn kah-di kure mikambe."\
\\xe Come here I've found honey, ground honey here in this red-antbed.\
\\uv W= kuboy\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Mikarndolk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de billabong and popular fishing camp in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx Mikawake\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de A flat grassed area near a small soak or rivulet below a cliff face in the Kunburray estate, Liverpool River region.\
\\xv Konda kunredkuken konda nakohbanj ruy kunak Bangardi na-yik-Marrirn, na-ngamed Stephanie wanjh ngal-beywurd konda Barrmo manih. Konda birri-dudji Mikawake kondah. \
\\xe This is a well known camping place and it was here that that old man Bangardi who was of Marrirn clan was burnt to death [in a kangaroo fire drive], um whatshername Stephanie is his daughter here at Barrmo. Here, they buried him at Mikawake here.\
\\sd place nmae\
\\dt 31/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx Mikirlin\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in outlying stone country in fv:Djalama clan estate.\
\\xv Mikirlin bolk-djalama.\
\\xe fv:Mikirlin is in fv:Djalama clan estate.\
\
\\lx Mikkuddji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Waridjngu clan estate\
\\uv E, and Kun-dedjnjenghmi\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mikme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de use mother-in-law avoidance register when speaking.\
\
\\lx Mikngalkken\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of an extinct patriclan in the lower Liverpool River district\
\\xv Djok ka-bolkburnbun Kubarledjawoy wanjh kanjdji Mikngalkken Korlng Karri, Kunjkalkbarredi kanjdji njamed\
Namarrkon Kadjangdi Yimayhyirud kakbi.\
\\xe The [Liverpool RIver] Djok clan estate finishes at Kubarledjawoy [Darwin Road Liverpool crossing] and downstream from there it is\
Mikngalkken clan territory at Korlng Karri and Kunjkalkbarredi and downstream from there is whatsit, Namarrkon Kadjangdi and\
Yimayhyirud [both for another clan(s)].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx Mikorrkorr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place on Mann river at the western end of fv:Kabarrebarre.\
\
\\lx Mikurlkurlyi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Jungle thicket in a gorge above Kunyikuymi on the Goomadeer River. A creek meets the Goomadeer River from the west at Kunyikuymi, and Mikurlkurlyi is a jungle thicket around 5km up this creek. An important place for yams.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Mikorrmolod\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Wurrik clan estate abundant in rock art.\
\
\\lx Milarrh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan esate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx milarrhwaken\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de wedge-tailed eagle\
\\sc Aquila audax\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= namaddol, W= kayimarri\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Milawkodj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area with a spring and patch of flat rock, around a kilometre east of Madjanngalkku in the Maburrinj estate. There are mankurndalh (Vitex glabrata) fruit trees here.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx milbabba\
\\ps adv.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de tomorrow\
\\pde malayi\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mildjirr\
\\ps n.\
\\re plant sp.\
\\de Unidentified plant name, small herb with pineate leaves.\
\\uv E\
\\sd plants\
\\id MG\
\\dt 01/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx mile\
\\va mileno\
\\ps n. incorp.\
\\sn 1\
\\re woven material\
\\de Any woven material including cloth, pandanus textile, string bags, fish trap. \
\\sn 2. \
de Bedding or cloth to sit on.\
\\xv Yi-milekurrmen.\
\\xe Put down the bedding.\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= mileno\
\\id MG\
\\dt 01/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx milemarnbun\
\\va milebun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re weave\
\\de Weave, make woven textile or string bag. Some speakers reject fv:milebun and insist on fv:milemarnbun.\
\\xv Kabirri-milebun kabirri-dahkendong kore djerrh kabirri-djuhke kore kukku, man-kinjdjek\
dorrengh.\
\\xe They weave [a basket] and put the cheeky yam into the dillybag, and then submerge it with the cheeky yam into the water.\
\\id DK\
\\dt 14/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx miledubbe\
\\ps adj.\
\\re tightly woven\
\\de Tightly woven, leaving no spaces in the weaving.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 01/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx milekarrkarr\
\\ps adj\
\\re coarsely woven\
\\de Coarsely woven, woven textile with wide spaces between warp and weft eg. a mosquito net.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 01/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx mileken\
\\ps n.\
\\re taro\
\\re fi:Colocasia_esculenta\
\\de Taro; perennial semi-aquatic fleshy herb to 1 m high with large elephant ear-like leaves; forming colonies along the edge of permanently wet areas.\
\\xv Mileken kukabo, kanjdji kukedjelk kure.\
\\xe Taro grows on the lower regions near water streams in cool places.\
\\sc Colocasia esculenta\
\\sy djamandarr\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 01/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx man-mileken\
\\ps n.\
\\re cheeky yam (kun-kurrng)\
\\de Cheeky Yam\
\\sc Amorphophallus. sp.\
\\pde man-yawok\
\\lit 'pertaining to the woven basket'\
\\ee The literal meaning of this kun-kurrng word refers to the proceedure for leaching the toxins out of this particular species of yam by placing the sliced yam in a woven basket and allowing it to sit in flowing water overnight.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Milerrelerre\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate. Literally 'in the grove of fi:Bossiaea_bossioides'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx mileruhrurrk\
\\ps check\
\\de loose or course weave, weaving with large hole spaces eg. a fishing net.\
\
\\lx Milerrelerre\
\\va Kulerrelerre\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site on the west side of the Goomadeer river formerly used as an Ubarr ceremony ground. Milerrelerre is just northwest of Namardan Kardayi, which was the camp used as a base when this ceremony was performed. There is a sacred flat stone here (\'91large flat round, with slight depression\'92) which was used in the ceremony. The Ubarr finishes with a ritual involving women climbing up pandanus trees, and there is pandanus at the site. The site is in open forest on a plateau. The place name literally means \'91in the grove of fi:Bossiaea_bossiaeoides shrubs. The root of the noun is fv:\'96lerrelerre and the prefixes fv:mi- or fv:ku- are both locatives, thus fv:mi-lerrelerre or fv:ku-lerrelerre \'91in the- fi:Bossiaea_bossiaeoides (grove)\'92.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx milh\
\\lc kun-milh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de forehead\
\
\\lx milhdarl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge blue-tongued.skink\
\\re northern blue-tongued skink\
\\re blue-tongued skink\
\\de northern blue-tongued skink\
\\sc Tiliqua scincoides intermedia\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\uv E= molerl, milhdarl, I = kurrih.\
\\sy molerl, kurrih\
\\pdn walamagorronggo (lit. 'big forehead')\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx milhdarl(h)\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de northern blue-tongued skink\
\\sc Tiliqua scincoides intermedia\
\\pdv kk\
\\uv I\
\\pde kurri, molerl.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx milhdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be standing/located with a visible front perspective [according to the observer].\
\\xv Kureh ka-milhdi murrikang.\
\\xe There's the truck over there.\
\
\\lx milh-makkayken\
\\ps adj.\
\\de cute, handsome\
\\xv And ngarri-yawan ngarri-mang njamed nadjinem nawu milhmakkayken\
milh-monemonem.\
\\xe We search for them and get them (as pets) those cute male Black Wallaroos.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx milhmerren\
\\ps refl.v.\
\\de face each other\
\\xv Ka-kom mayh kabene-milhmerren Dilebang.\
\\xe The rainbow serpents heads stand there facing each other at Dilebang.\
\
\\lx milhmonemonek\
\\ps adj\
\\de quiet natured, tame (of people or animals).\
\\xv Ngarri-yawan ngarri-mang njamed nadjinem nawu milhmakkayken milhmonemonek.\
\\xe We like to search for them and get black wallaroos (as pets) especially the handsome and very quiet males.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx milhmurrng\
\\lc kun-milhmurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de frontal skull bone\
\
\\lx milhno\
\\va kun-milh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de forehead\
\
\\lx milirl\
\\ps n.\
\\re vine species\
\\re fi:Trophis_scandens\
\\de Vine found growing in jungle thickets.\
\\sc Trophis scandens fs:formerly Malaisia scandens\
\\ee Used in the construction of conical fish traps called fv:man-djabu.\
\\sd plants\
\
\\lx Milmilngkan\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate not far from Kurrurldul community. Site of a very sacred billabong the\
resting place of a rainbow serpent and her offspring a mythical spirit antilopine kangaroo.\
Milngmilngkan is a seasonal camp for some fv:Kurulk clan people who camp there in late dry season.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Milombeng\
\\ps n. place name\
\\de place in fv:Balngarra clan estate\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx miluru\
\\lc kun-miluru\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de tree, stick, wooden object\
\\pde kun-dulk\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mim\
\\lc kun-mim\
\\va mimno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de eyes\
\\pdn kk = kun-kalngun.\
\
\\lx mimal\
\\lc kun-mimal\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de fire\
\\pde kun-rak\
\\ee Dalabon fv:mimal 'fire'.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mimalk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate.\
\
\\lx mimallawme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr mimal+lawme 'fire+bite'\
\\de smoke tobacco\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde -wungme\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx Mimanjarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Tomkinson River flood plain crossing on Darwin road.\
\
\\lx Mimarlarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mimarn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Sacred site on Mann River on the other side of Mumeka Homeland Centre.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mimarrewahwa\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place with site for fish increase ritual. In Wurrik clan estate (check).\
\
\\lx mimbabi\
\\ps n.\
\\de\
\\de person or animal which stares hard at OBJ or watches continuously\
\\xv Yirrambarn, yerinj mimbabi nakkan, milh-bininj kan-nahnan munguyh.\
\\xe The fv:Tyto family owls are birds which stare hard, they have faces like humans and they are always\
watching us.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mimbayhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de open eyes\
\
\\lx mimbi\
\\ps adj.\
\\re alive\
\\de Alive.\
\\xv Ngad karrinjilngmak bu dird kabolkwolkan, wanjh, wanjh karribolknan bu kukak, nungka kayawoyhmimbimen. [\'85] Nungka kadjaldarrkid kanmarnbun karrimimbi mandjewk dja mandjewk.\
\\xe We are happy when the moon lights up the sky, so we can see at night. The moon comes back to life [every night]. [\'85] He is always alive, he gives us life year after year. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 120\
\\id DK\
\\dt 14/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx mimbimen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re become alive\
\\de Become alive, come to life.\
\\xv Ngad karrinjilngmak bu Dird kabolkwolkan, wanjh, wanjh karribolknan bu kukak, nungka kayawoyhmimbimen.\
\\xe We are happy when the moon lights up the sky, so we can see at night. The moon comes back to life [every night].\
\
\\lx mimbulerri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de pupil of eye\
\
\\lx Mimbilawuy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Jawoyn patriclan\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx mimbome\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de grimace (in pain)\
\\xv Bu kandi-korn-dowkke karri-mim-bome.\
\\xe When they kick us in the testicles it makes us squint in pain.\
\
\\lx mimbudbudme\
\\ps v.i./t.\
\\de blink eyes\
\\xv Ngun-mim-delke yi-mimbudbudmen.\
\\xe She's going to put drops in your eyes, so blink them.\
\
\\lx mimbudme\
\\ps v.i./t.\
\\de eyes closed\
\\xv Ngurri-mim-budmen!\
\\xe Close your eyes (all of you).\
\
\\lx mimdarrarrhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de show a wild angry look in the eye, show an angry expression on the face.\
\\xv Ngan-marne-mim-darrarrhmeng.\
\\xe He looked at me angrily.\
\
\\lx mimdarrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de 'pop eye', eyes wide open in disbelief, etc.\
\\sy mim-kolhmeng\
\
\\lx mimdaykimuk\
\\ps adj.\
\\de large eyed, goggle eyes\
\\xv Njale kan-kuknan yi-mimdaykimuk.\
\\xe What are you staring at big eyes!\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx mimdayno\
\\ps n.\
\\de eyeball\
\\xv Yi-mimdaykimuk\
\\xe You big eye (swear word).\
\
\\lx mimdord\
\\ps n.\
\\de a person who has a very strong association with a particular animal and spends a lot of time hunting it.\
\\pdn rarely used\
\\so Jimmy Kalarriya, DK\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mimdubberranj\
\\ps adj.\
\\de blind\
\
\\lx mimdjamud\
\\lc kun-mimdjamud\
\\va mimdjamudno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de eyebrows\
\
\\lx mimdjokko\
\\ps n.?\
\\de Asian person\
\\lit 'tight eye'\
\
\\lx mimdjoleng\
\\ps adj.\
\\de having good eyesight, can see well from a long distance.\
\\xv Mibbarr mim-djoleng ka-nan djarre-beh djenj ka-warme djarreh-beh kam-kolung\
ka-mang.\
\\xe The white-bellied sea-eagle has really sharp eyesight, it can see fish from far away and it comes down\
from a long way to get it.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mimih\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de thin spirits who live in the stone country inside cracks in the rock or caves etc. They are often\
mischievous and not particularly friendly. They do not venture outside of the protection of their rock\
environment as even a light wind can snap their fragile bones. The common variety is sometimes called\
'mimih borrorrokang' after a place of the same name in fv:na-Darnkorlo country near fv:Kawidjdji\
meaning 'place where the mimih moved ahead quickly'. This variety of mimih are said to be yirridjdja.\
\\ng see also fv:ngal-malanjdirrihdirri, fv:marrawirri\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mimihke\
\\ps v.?\
\\de attested in fv:bo-mimihke- cause fat to come out of meat when cooking it.\
\\sy njiwnjiwhke\
\
\\lx mimke\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de feel sleepy\
\\uv W\
\\uv I=mimkodjdje\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mimkinje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de get smoke in the eyes\
\
\\lx mimkongiwern\
\\ps adj.\
\\de compassionate\
\
\\lx mimkorrhme\
\\lc ka-mimkorrhme\
\\ps v. body parts\
\\de 'busted eye'\
\
\\lx mimkurduk\
\\lc man-mimkurduk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de plant which has small black berries\
\\sc unidentified\
\\pdn kk = man-kurlngunj.\
\
\\lx mimkurlahburrkkimukmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de skin and area beneath eyes return to healthy condition (after being hollow due to illness).\
\
\\lx mimkurlahno\
\\ps n.\
\\de eyelid\
\
\\lx mimkurrkurrbme\
\\cf see fv:kurrkurrbme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mimladbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de turn OBJ's eye due to an intense physical sensation eg. eating ice cream with a toothache\
\\xv Bele ngan karrmeng wanjh ngan-mim-ladbom.\
\\xe That cramp made my eye's roll.\
\
\\lx mimlewkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de look at someone suggestively, give someone 'the eye'.\
\\xv Ka-karrme mararradj. Nga-nang bi-mim-lewkmeng.\
\\xe She's got a boyfriend. I saw him give her 'the eye'.\
\
\\lx mimlurlkulurlmeng\
\\ps n. (verbal)\
\\de raised lumps, wart\
\
\\lx mimmudno\
\\ps n.\
\\de eyelashes\
\
\\lx mimnalk\
\\lc kun-mimnalk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de tears\
\\xv Nalkbom wanjh bi-mim-djuhkeng kun-mimnalk ngalngarre wanjh mim-makminj.\
\\xe She cried and her tears fell into his eyes which healed him.\
\
\\lx mimnarrnghnarrng\
\\ps adj.\
\\de droopy eyes, 'bags' under the eyes.\
\
\\lx mimno\
\\va man-mim\
\\agr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de seeds of plants\
\\sn 2\
\\de firearm bullets and shotgun cartridges and (by semantic extention) any small\
globular cylindrical or bead-like objects\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Mimolorrk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Mimolorrk is a site in the Maburrinj estate on a tributary creek of the Goomadeer River. The site is about 18km due south of Mamardawerre. Djawidda Nadjangorle used to live here, accessing it by a road he made via Kudjekbinj and Demed hill. The iron from his old shed is still lying on the ground. He had a HF radio there for communications. This is around the northern border of the Maburrinj estate. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx mimwodburren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de wave hands in front of one's eyes, ususally to swat flies.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mimwonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de show the pupils or 'blacks' of one's eyes.\
\\xv Birri-bebmeng birri-djal-barndi birri-mim-wonghmeng.\
\\xe They arrived and just sat up there showing the pupils of their eyes.\
\
\\lx Minadanayu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Marrin clan estate\
\\ee Darnki Kurddal.\
\\xe It's near a place called fv:Kurddal.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Minaka\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Iwaidja patriclan in north-west Arnhem Land\
\\ee Minaka [also spelt Minaga in Iwaidja orthography] and Kardurra, Djurrbuka, Marnanan, Murran and Akarlda clans [spelt using Bininj\
Kunwok orthography] are in an aggregate known as fv:Bulayalwarrki.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx mindjadngani\
\\lc na-/ngal-mindjadngani\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my brother-in-law/wife, your son/daughter, you are my fv:kakkak (note: this\
illustration is an example of the unusual designation of a second choice in-law as a son/daughter).\
\\cn na-mindjadngu./ngal-mindjadngani\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mindjadngu\
\\lc na-mindjadngu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my son your brother-in-law, we call each other fv:kakkak.\
\
\\lx Mindjilang\
\\ps place n.\
\\de Croker Island, Minjilang (the main community on Croker Island).\
\\xv Ngaye ngabolkbawong Warruwi ngawam Minjdjilang ngahni.\
\\xe I left Goulburn Island and was living on Croker Island. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 252\
\\sd placename\
\\id DK\
\\dt 30/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx minikorlkorl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de pacific heron\
\\sc Ardea pacifica\
\
\\lx mininj\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_sublanata\
\\de kind of prostrate Acacia shrub\
\\ee There are both prostrate and erect forms of Acacia sublanata each with a separate name in Kundedjnjenghmi.\
The prostrate form is fire resistant and is often found around the margins of cypress pine groves.\
\\xv An-mininj kure ankung ka-rrahkendong ka-yukkurrme ka-marnbun an-kung.\
\\xe The fi:Acacia_sublanata bush fills up the honey hives, they (the bees) put liquid honey (in the hives) and make honey.\
\\sc Acacia sublanata |fs\{(prostrate form only)\}\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx Mingakngak\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Named site on a creek in the Djalbangurrk estate. Located in a remote stone country area east of the upper Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer), however the water flows northeast from here away from the Gumardir. It eventually becomes Kumarringbang Creek (mapped as \'91Manggabor Creek\'92) which flows past Kumarrirnbang outstation. Mingakngak is about 23km north-northwest of Kabulwarnamyo outstation. Near Yarrikarnkurrk.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx minj\
\\ps neg.part.\
\\de not, didn't\
\\xv Minj nga-rayi.\
\\xe I didn't go.\
\\uv E = marrek\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx minjbi\
\\ps adv.\
\\de Just to give it a go, just trying, attempt to do to see what results. Marks the outcome as being a result the speaker is not sure of.\
\\xv Bonj minjbi ngarrben-marneyime delek ngarri-yawam larrk.\
\\xe That'll do it's enough we can tell them we looked for white clay but didn't get enough.\
\
\\lx minjminj\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge hibertia.sp.\
\\re fi:Hibertia_sp.\
\\de perrenial prostrate trailing herb\
\\xv Ngurrurdu an-me nuye, an-minjminj.\
\\xe The hibbertia herb is food for emus.\
\\sc Hibbertia sp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx minjmo\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Memecylon.arnhemensis\
\\re fi:Memecylon_arnhemensis\
\\de kind of plant\
\\xv An-minjmo nabiwo an-kung ka-rri.\
\\xe The fi:Memecylon_arnhemensis plant has fv:nabiwo honey in it (i.e. its flowers).\
\\sc Memecylon arnhemensis\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_mountfordiae\
\\de kind of Acacia which is not actually found in the range of Bininj Kunwok speaking territory. fi:Acacia_mountfordiae is only found to\
the west near Kunbarlanja and so Bininj Kunwok speakers have applied the name for another known plant (fi:Memecylon_arnhemensis) in order to refer to this Acacia which is not in their botanical repertoire.\
\\xv An-minjmo an-marninj ka-rohrok, kono yelo ka-karrme.\
\\xe The fi:Acacia mountfordiae shrub is similar to fv:an-marninj but has yellow flowers.\
\\sc Acacia mountfordiae\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx minjmo an-yahwurd\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Canthium.sp.\
\\re fi:Canthium_sp.\
\\de kind of plant similar to fi:Memecylon_arnhemensis but smaller.\
\\sc possibly Canthium sp.?\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx minjuk\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de Antidesma ghaesembila berry bush\
\\pde man-djulukkurn\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Mirl\'9cb\'9crr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mirnde\
\\ps verbal prefix\
\\de be in a group\
\\xv Wakkewakken nungan ka-djalni kumekke munguyhmunguyh. Yimerranj. Ka-mirnderri\
maitbi marrek yah kudjikudji.\
\\xe The Wakkewakken honey spirit just stays there forever. It became like that. Maybe there's a few of\
them, no there's only one.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mirndekaberrk\
\\ps ?\
\\de few out in the open\
\\xv [check]\
\
\\lx mirndekudjikudji\
\\ps adj.\
\\de small group, only a few\
\
\\lx mirndemonamerren\
\\ps v.i..\
\\de gather selves together in big numbers\
\\uv W\
\\uv I = -kaberrkni\
\\xv Kabirri-mirndemonamerren.\
\\xe There is a crowd of people.\
\\uv W\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mirndeno\
\\ps adj.\
\\de few\
\\xv Mirndeno kah-ni kunj [check].\
\\xe There's a few kangaroos there.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx mirnidjokkolo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of annual grass\
\\sc Setaria apiculata\
\\xv Mirnidjokkolo mayhmayh nuye nin.\
\\xe The fv:Setaria apiculata\} grass belongs to the double barred finch fv:Taeniopygia bichenovii.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx Mirnindji\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place near Bolkdjam outstation.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx mirninj\
\\va anmirninj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of erect shrub 1-2m with sharp leaf tips and small yellow flowers\
\\sc Labichea nitida\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mirnmo\
\\lc man-mirnmo\
\\ps n.\
\\de plant name, grows on rock\
\\nt check, man-mirn?\
\
\\lx Mirarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a number of patriclans in the Kakadu and Alligator Rivers region \
\\xv Bu kabirri-bolkbun kun-red ka-rrowen, kun-red bu karri-bolkdowen namekke fi:story nuye ngadberre ngad, nawu kumekke bininj namekke bininj nawu Mirarr namekke.\
\\xe If they destroy that place the country will die, our home, we will all die along with our story, those people, the Mirarr people.\
\\ee These various Mirarr clans are referred to by the clan name plus language name in postposition i.e. Mirarr Kundjeyhmi, Mirarr\
Urningangk, Mirarr Erre and 2 different clans both with the name of Mirarr Mengerrdji.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx mirburlu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de yiman 'burdbarrk', na-kimuk, yellow or white duyhno\
\\sc CHECK\
\\so JD-D\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Mirelk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate near Dilebang on the escarpment. There is a cold water spring there.\
\\uv I\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mirelk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate significant for its burial areas.\
\
\\lx Mirelk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate, south of fv:Mumeka, upstream\
\\ee Kaddum Mirelk\
\\xe Mirelk is upstream (from fv:Mumeka)\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx miri\
\\ps n.\
\\de oar for water craft, often made from mangrove trees\
\\ee Mawng miri= 'tail of dugong'.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx miri\
\\lc man-miri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Acacia sublanata\
\\ee small shrub with small triangular leaves and yellow flowers.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Miridjba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de crossing on Mankorlod creek in fv:Kardbam clan estate.\
\\ee Karlkberd djang, Nakorrkko bene-wam. Kure Nakorrkko bene-burriweng barlkkan, bene-bom\
karlkberd.\
\\xe Place where the fv:nakorrkko ancestors threw a boomerang and killed a wallaroo.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mirk\
\\va mirrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Trevally, Golden Trevally.\
\\sc Gnathanodon speciosus.\
\
\\lx Mirud\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de fv:yibba or frog sacred site at a billabong in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx Mirurr\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Section of creek on a plain in the Maburrinj estate. Mirurr is upstream of Mimolorrk, about 5km to the south-southeast. There is a billabong on the creek at Mirurr, and the water eventually flows into the Goomadeer River. There is nothing here in the way of fishing but numerous kangaroos on the surrounding plain.  Mirurr is on a traditional walking track to the Durlmangkarr estate in the east, with the track first heading to Ngalurdbirrhmi at the edge of the Kumarrirnbang estate. \
\\xv Mirurr arriyoy wanjh malahmalayi Ngalurdbirrhmi arriyoy. Kumekke-beh barrhbuni wanjh Berddolkko arriwam arriyoy arriderrehmi Mibarra. Kumekke arriyoy karrbarda arringuni wanjh arriderrehmi Kamanemdi. Kumekke-beh arridolkkayi arriwam Yolngbuyken. Malayi arridjalbolkyurrhkeyi Nadjabba, Kurrbbirnbaleng arriyoy. Nadjabba bim nakuken.\uc0\u8232 \\xe We camped at Mirurr and then in the morning we went to Ngalurdbirrhmi and camped there. From there, at first light we walked to Berddolkko and then moved further to Mibarra. We camped there and ate long yams and then continued on to Kamanemdi. From there we set off for Yolngbuyken. The next morning we would walk past Nadjabba and arrive at Kurrbbirnbaleng where we would camp. Nadjabba is a an important rock art site.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Mirwi\
\\va Miwi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan in the lower Liverpool River district\
\\xv Yo bedda Mirwi karrkakarrkad la bedda kanjdjikanjdji yoh. Konda Born.\
\\xe Yes, the Mirwi clan land is inland and that other group [the Born clan] is down [riverine]. This is Born here [on the Liverpool River].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx Mirradjdja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Rembarrnga patriclan\
\\xv 'Ngawahdungh', kun-dangwok nuye, na-Mirradjdja.\
\\xe 'Ngawahdungh' is the Mirradjdja clan fi:kun-dangwok interjection.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx Mirradjek\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place on Tomkinson River flood plain in fv:ankubarrbarr Kunib\'ccdji clan estate.\
\
\\lx Mirrayarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate. This is the name for the site of fv:Barrihdjowkkeng Homeland\
Centre. fv:Barrihdjowkkeng proper is actually a fv:wubarr ceremony site nearby. fv:Mirrayarr is an\
important fv:yawkyawk sacred site.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mirrhbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de sharpen\
\\de 2 cause nausea from eating too much\
\\xv Kan-mirrhbun manme karri-werhme.\
\\xe Food can make us feel like vomiting.\
\
\\lx mirrhdubbe\
\\ps adj.\
\\de blunt (of cutting implements)\
\
\\lx mirrhmak\
\\ps adj.\
\\de sharp\
\\cf -mirrhbun\
\\ce v.t., to sharpen\
\
\\lx mirrhmirrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de shimmer in the heat\
\\xv Ka-dung-mirrhmirrhme.\
\\xe It's shimmering in the heat.\
\
\\lx mirrhno\
\\ps n.\
\\de sharp grass, sharp things\
\
\\lx Mirrirridj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Mirrirridj is a remnant fv:anbinik (fi:Allosyncarpia_ternata) forest in the Djalbangurrk estate. It lies at the headwaters of a tributary creek of the upper Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer) about 4km west-northwest of Makkalarl. The forest is surrounded by much drier savanna.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx mirrk\
\\va mirk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Trevally, Golden Trevally.\
\
\\lx Mirruwidmi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place near fv:Bowidu in fv:Kurulk clan estate\
\
\\lx Miwakkawilk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de small place name in Marrngunj area, Kulmarru/Kurulk clan estate.\
\\xv Miwakkawilk karrikad-kah kunkukenh.\
\\xe Miwakkawilk is on the western side, a well known camping place (seasonal camp).\
\
\\lx Miwarlaberh\
\\va Miwarlabeh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de Place east of Yikarrakkal outstation, popular wallaby hunting area.\
\\ee duwa\
\\xv Miwarlaberh berk djang kah-di. Kanjdji Yikarrakkal\
\\xe There is a deaf adder dreaming site at Miwarlaberh. Yikarrakkal is downstream.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Miwele\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Billabong place in fv:Kurulk clan estate.\
\
\\lx miyarrurl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de wooden fighting club\
\\xv Namorrorddo ka-karrme miyarrurl ka-ben-bun.\
\\xe fv:Na-morrorddo has a fighting club which he uses to kill people.\
\\ee may be related to Pama-Nyungan *mirru 'wooden club'.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Miyene\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx mkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de bring\
\\xv Yimka kondanj.\
\\xe Bring it here.\
\
\\lx mo\
\\lc na-/ngal-mo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de son, daughter, referent by parent to son/daughter. (Voc.)\
\
\\lx Mobakka\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate, paperbark plain.\
\
\\lx moban\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\sn 1\
\\de Sleepy Cod\
\\sc Oxyeleotris lineolata\
\\sn 2\
\\de Also possibly Flathead Goby\
\\sc Glossogobius giuris\
\\ee duwa\
\\uv Kundedjwarre.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Moban Kahdal\'9c\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in fv:Waybburda estate.\
\\ee place name connected with a fish name; spotted gudgeon?\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx mobardno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de thigh bone\
\
\\lx Mobarn\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\re place name\
\\de Outstation of Weemol about 20km north of Bulman, also known as Bluewater.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 18/Jun/2016\
\
\\lx mobban\
\\pr man-, an-, \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Terminalia.carpentariae\
\\re fi:Terminalia_carpentariae\
\\re billy goat plum\
\\de billy goat plum, kind of Terminalia tree with an edible furry-skinned fruit, grows in sandstone country in dry sandy soils\
\\xv Bulbbe nawu kabarri-barung. Barri-baruy nawu marnah nakka mobban. Ngale karri-barubarung.\
\\xe We plaster it over the dilly bags (used for collecting honey). They smeared over the resin from the fi:Terminalia_carpentariae tree.\
That's what we used to smear it with [in order to make it leak proof].\
\\xv Man-me nuye ka-ngun mobban. Njamed man-marlak kabirri-ngun. Mobban kabirri-ngun badken mobban.\
\\xe They [nabarleks] eat billy goat plums. And also fi:Terminalia_ferdinandiana. They eat the billy goat plums that grow in the rock\
country.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Terminalia carpentariae\
\\uv I, W= man-mobban, Djnj= an-mobban, E= mobban\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx Mobi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate.\
\
\cf2 \\lx mobik\
\\ps adj.\
\\re skinny\
\\de Skinny, scrawny, skeletal.\
\\xv Ngalmobik.\
\\xe She is scrawny.\
\\xv Yiman bu nayahwurd, yika mobik, minj kawernhkanjdi nungka kadjalwohdjobke mandjawak kunwardde kunyahwurd kunkanj dja kamunkewe ba kare kakimukmen kabalemdangen.\
\\xe If the [kangaroos] are young or skinny, without much flesh on them, he [Nakidjkidj] will just cut a little bit of meat off them with his stone knife and let them go again, so they can get big and fat.    \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 208\
\\id DK\
\\dt 13/Aug/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx modme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de get, receive\
\\pde -mang\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx modmiken\
\\lc kun-modmiken\
\\ps n.\
\\de power, strength (also of human made objects eg. batteries, vehicles).\
\
\\lx moduyhmoduyh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lizard.sp., \
\\re lizard sp., ring-tailed dragon\
\\re ring-tailed dragon\
\\de ring tailed dragon (a kind of lizarrd)\
\\xv Karndayh, moduyhmoduyh kabini-ngun bakarlbakarl.\
\\xe The female Antilopine kangaroo and the ring-tailed dragon eat fi:Curcuma_australasica.\
\\uv E\
\\dt 07/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx modjangh\
\\lc man-modjangh\
\\va modjanghno\
\\ps n.\
\\de the 'first course' of a meal of game consisting of the offal (liver, kidneys, heart etc) which have been roasted on the coals.\
\\uv W\
\\uv I, Djnj= modjanghno, modjamodjanghno (plural).\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx modjarn\
\\va modjarnh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge honey.sp\
\\re honey type, and bees\
\\re fi:Tetragonula_mellipes (E)\
\\de Type of honey found in termite mounds, trees and the ground.\
\\xv Bene-wam wanjh ngal-kudji nang man-kung wanjh bi-marnekayhmeng ngal-buyika bi-marneyimeng, "Yim-ray nga-ngalkeng man-kung, nanih modjarn kah-di kure mikambe."\
\\xe Two women went and one found honey. She called out to the other one, "Come here, I've found honey here in this antbed."\
\\xv A: nabiwo karri-yime diywarra karri-yime. B: Ngad kun-rayek ngarri-ngeybun modjarnh.\
\\xe A: We (in Kundedjnjenghmi) say fv:nabiwo and fv:diywarra. B: We in Kune (Kun-rayek) call it [nabiwo] fv:modjarnh.\
\\sc Tetragonula mellipes\
\\uv E\
\\ur I, Djnj, W= nabiwo\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 04/Oct/2010\
\
\\lx modjarewarre\
\\cf see kunmodjarewarre\
\
\\lx modjarrkdorrinj\
\\ps n.\
\\de Skewing relationship of cross cousins in the same generation to become kin in adjacent generations. Thus FZD>FZ and FZS>F. This is often done between a person and their brother's wife who is a classificatory cross-cousin (FZC, MBC). Brother's wife will be addressed as fv:berlu FZ and her brothers will be called fv:ngabbard 'F'.\
\\xv Ngane-modjarrkdorrinj.\
\\xe We relate to each other by virtue of cross-cousin skewing.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx modjarrkki\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Fresh Water Crocodile\
\\sc Crocodylus johnstoni\
\\pdn kk = I= ngaldjakdjalarrk\
\\uv E, Kdj, Djnj\
\\ur I= kumoken, E syn.= koyo, nawulhmu, Djnj syn.= mokkorri\
\\ee REM = koyo\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx modjarrkki\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Fresh Water Crocodile\
\\sc Crocodylus johnstoni\
\\pdn kk = ngaldjakdjalarrk\
\\uv E, Djnj, Kdj, W\
\\uv I = kumoken\
\\uv E synonym = nawulhmu\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx modjdje\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de an unidentified swamp grass\
\\xv Modjdje yiman man-kurladj.\
\\xe fv:Modjdje is like Eleocharis dulcis.\
\
\\lx modjdje\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of spike rush\
\\sc Eleocharis sphacelata\
\
\\lx modjdje\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wetland.rush.sp.\
\\re fi:Eleocharis_sphacelata\
\\de kind of wetland rush\
\\xv An-modjdje ka-rri Kunrorrekalurlhdi, marrek ka-rri ku-wardde, kure kabbal ka-rri.\
\\xe The fi:Eleocharis_sphacelata rush grows at Kunrorrekalurlhdi (near Marrkolidjban), it doesn't grow in the stone country, but on the\
plains.\
\\sc Eleocharis sphacelata\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx mohmoyak (check glottal)\
\\lc na-mohmoyak (check glottal)\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de The spirits of the first people who died and turned into Na-momoyak. They are said to be able to\
inhabit objects such as trees and have left ancient rock paintings in the escarpment country.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Mok\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan on the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Nakka yi-na na-Mok yiman nga-bolkngehngeybun kumekke ka-djalre Djurrih Kawokbebme ka-burnbun kumekke,\
na-Mok. Beh mak na-Djorrorlam karrimen yirridjdja, ya kurih ka-yime. \
\\xe You see, these are all Mok clan names I have been reciting and the Mok country goes right up to Djurrih Kawokbebme and finishes\
there, the Mok estate. From there it's Djorrorlam clan country, fi:yirridjdja moiety, yeah that's right.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx mok\
\\lc kun-mok\
\\va mokno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de sore, scab, infection\
\\xv nga-kanem-mok\
\\xe I've got an infected ear.\
\\xv Njale ngun-bayeng? Nga-djal-mok.\
\\xe What happened to you? I've just got a sore.\
\
\\lx mokbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de knock a sore\
\\xv Kan-mok-bun!\
\\xe You're hitting my sore!\
\
\\lx mokdowen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sore heal\
\\xv Nga-mok-doweng.\
\\xe My sore has healed.\
\
\\lx moken\
\\ps quantifier\
\\de group, whole lot, everything\
\\xv Birri-moken-bawoyi kun-warre.\
\\xe They should leave it all, its no good [i.e. intoxicating substances such as alcohol and kava].\
\
\\lx mokenmo\
\\ps n.\
\\de group, flock, herd\
\\xv Munabbarr dulbumeng mokenmo.\
\\xe The magpie geese all flew away as a flock.\
\
\\lx Mokkalinj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate near Marrkolidjban.\
\\dv Kun-bolk-born darnki Marrkolidjban\
\
\\lx mokkare\
\\lc kun-mokkare\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de old sore, scar\
\
\\lx mokkorri\
\\ps n.\
\\ge freshwater.crocodile\
\\re freshwater crocodile\
\\de freshwater crocodile\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= kumoken, W= modjarrkki\
\
\\lx mokkoyh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de male pubic coverings made from tassles of bush string or sometimes feathers of parrots and painted\
with ochres.\
\\pdn kk = burldjinh\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Mokmek\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place name in Rol clan estate, a crossing on a tributary of the Mann River near the hill called Bung\
Kabaddudjeng (on the road from Manmoyi to Marlkawo)\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mokorlno\
\\ps n.\
\\re clearing\
\\de A clearing, typically on bedrock on the margin of a watercourse in stone country.\
\\xv Mokorlngno, kumekke benebokkurrmerrinj Nakorrkko, karriwakbom bolkki. Karriyerrkayi ngorrkberlko nanih ngunbolkbukkayi ngurrwoneng. Kabirribokyo daluk bedman banibokkurrmerrinj bedman Bininj. \
\\xe A clear place, there where the Nakorrkko place their footprints where we circled around [in the helicopter] today. If we had landed your fv:doydoy who is my skewed father here [points to him] could have shown the place to you both. There are footprints of the two women [wives of the Nakorrkko] and also the two men put their footprints there [in the rock].\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 28/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx mokurrkurr\
\\pref kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clan\
\\re clan\
\\re patri-clan\
\\de patri-clan\
\\xv Bu nangale, na-ngale kabi-djawan, ka-yime konda nangale nuye kunred. Bu ngudda ke kunred yiman Kunbarlanja o yiman kunred kure kunmokurrkurr kayo, yiman Mirarr kun-mokurrkurr. Bu nga-djawan nga-yime ngudda Mirarr, konda kun-red Mirarr because kun-red dja namekke kun-mokurrkurr kabene-re. Kun-red dja kun-mokurrkurr, kun-red dja kun-mokurrkurr. \
\\xe When anyone should ask someone 'Whose country is this?'. If your country [land] is at Gunbalanya or some place in your clan estate, such as the Mirarr patri-clan. If I ask, I say, 'you are Mirarr [clan]', and this is Mirarr land because the place and the clan go together. Place and clan, place and clan.\
\\uv W, Kdj, Djnj\
\\ur I= kun-nguya, E= dawurrono, kun-dawurro\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 03/Jul/2011\
\
\\lx mokurrkurrkadjurren\
\\ps v. reflex.\
\\ge share.clan\
\\re clans joining together in company\
\\de share patri-clan territory with a closely aligned neighbouring patri-clan\
\\xv Birri-mokurrkurrkadjurrenni birri-Mirarrni yika nakudji na-Mirarr nawu kanjdji kuni kukabo kanjdji.\
\\xe Those clans used to share territory, the Mirarr clan and another [different] Mirarr clan on this creek further downstream.\
\\sd kinship\
\
\\lx molarrinj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge kangaroo\
\\re kangaroo [kun-balak register]\
\\de 'kangaroo' in fv:kun-balak register, used for any individual species but reduced to a general term when using the respectful fv:kun-balak register\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kunj\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx molehmolenj\
\\ps n. (plu.)\
\\de group of women\
\\pdn kk = kardukardu\
\
\\lx molerl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge blue-tongued.skink\
\\de northern blue-tongued skink\
\\sc Tiliqua scincoides intermedia\
\\pdn kk = milhdarlh\
\\uv E\
\\sy kurrih\
\\pdn kk = milhdarlh\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Molerrhlerrh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Sacred site on Mann River upstream from Kubumi. Place where rainbow serpent pierced the stone bank of the Mann River.\
\\ee duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx molknan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spy on something/someone hidden secretly\
\\xv Nga-molknang kunj.\
\\xe I saw the kangaroo in hiding.\
\\nt check meaning.\
\
\\lx molkno\
\\ps adv.\
\\de secretly, stealthily\
\\ee Rem. = monidj\
\\xv Monidj biyi kara. (Rembarrnga)\
\\xe Molkno bininj ka-re.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx moloborndok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de possibly the velvet gecko\
\\sc Oedura marmorata\
\\ee a brightly coloured gecko\
\\so MK and OK\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx molonghkowarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg., My sister, your mother, you are my nephew.\
\\cn ngal-mulebe.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx molorrk\
\\pr an-, man-, \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fi:Clerodendrum_floribundum\
\\re fi:Clerodendrum_floribundum\
\\de kind of shrub or small tree (1.5-4m) which grows in sandstone vine forest\
\\xv An-molorrk ku-warddelungurr, ku-kurlk ka-rri.\
\\xe The fi:Clerodendrum_floribundum tree grows in the ground in sheltered rocky gorges.\
\\sc Clerodendrum floribundum\
\\sy andjaridi\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx mombanno\
\\ps n.\
\\de cluster, bunch\
\\xv Yi-karung mombanno yi-mang, kunkernkel yi-djirridjbun yi-bawon ka-larrhme wanjh\
yi-kinje.\
\\xe Dig up the bunch (of tubers), wash the mud off and leave it to dry before you cook it.\
\\uv E\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx momoyak\
\\lc na-momoyak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de The spirits of the first people who died and turned into Na-momoyak. They are said to be able to\
inhabit objects such as trees and have left ancient rock paintings in the escarpment country.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx monambadbad\
\\ps adv.\
\\de in single file\
\\xv Yiman wolewoleh birrim-yurrubirdihmeng nganabbarru monambadbad.\
\\xe Just like yesterday when the buffalo came galloping towards us in single file.\
\
\\lx monamen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de become dark\
\\pde ngokdan\
\\xv monaminj\
\\pde ngokdanj.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx monbuhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de open up to obtain food, mostly used to refer to opening a tree to extract wild honey. Also to open up\
an animal by butchering it. Can be used as a threat to another person in a fight.\
\\xv Yi-djare kuk-kurrme monbuhme!\
\\xe You want me to kill you and cut you open!\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mondi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de sit, be\
\\pde -ni\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx monhme\
\\ps v.t\
\\pdv kk\
\\de have, hold\
\\pde karrme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx monidj\
\\ps interj.\
\\re dialect interjection\
\\de Interjection used by Gundedjnjenghmi speakers as a dialectal marker.\
\\xv Andehne monidj!\
\\xe This one here!\
\\xv Kabani-kadjung manu monidj kure kanjdjikanjdji Kundjeyhmi woh. Andehne nga-yime.\
\\xe The two (dialects) which use [the demonstratives] "fv:manu" and "fv:monidj", and downstream is Kundjeyhmi yes. I [also] use [the demonstrative word] "fv:andehne".\
\\dt 03/May/2014\
\
\\lx monidjbebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de appear by stealth or sneak up\
\
\\lx monidjre\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sneak up, go stealthily\
\\ur Rem. = monidj 'secretly'\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mono\
\\va kun-mo\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\sd body part\
\\de bones\
\\xv Ya 'bag' kang kaluk mono bi-rrahkendoy mani mani kuni kuni kuni bi-bid-dahkendoy\
kuni kun-berd kuni birrkbirrkno ` bi-rrahdahkendoy bi-yi-rayi.\
\\xe He got a bag and filled it up with all the bones, the fingers, the ribs, the tail, he filled it up and off he\
went with it.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mononmang\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stay still\
\\xv Yi-mononma, wardi kornobolo kan-nan.\
\\xe Stand still or else the wallaby will see us.\
\
\\lx mongerrh\
\\ps prop. n. mythology\
\\de spirit being, dangerous to humans.\
\\xv Mongerrh, mongerrh, mongerrh, mongerrh kan-djula birrirri buwani bu, 'dorlh'.\
\\xe (An archaic song about fv:Mongerrh the evil spirit, and the 'dorlh' is the striking of the clap sticks).\
\\xv Nani nawu na-yungki ngad karri-ngeybun, bininj, yo nakka kanh-nguyi na-bang na-bang,\
na-bang na-yuhyungki Mongerrh kun-waral yiman.\
\\xe He is someone from creation times, we call him (like that), a human form but he eats people, and he's\
dangerous, very dangerous, Mongerrh is like a spirit.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Mongomo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate.\
\
\\lx monjalhmonjalh\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\va an-monjalnghmonjalng\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge fi:Hibiscus_arnhemensis\
\\ge fi:Abelmoschus_moschatus\
\\re fi:Hibiscus_arnhemensis\
\\re fi:Abelmoschus_moschatus\
\\de generic term for a number of hibiscus with pinkish-purple flowers or other similar herbs with similar flowers\
\\sc Hibiscus arnhemensis, Abelmoschus moschatus\
\\sn 2\
\\ge fi:Coleus_scutellarioides\
\\re fi:Coleus_scutellarioides\
\\de Slender herb up to 1m high with pink flowers on long inflorescences (up to 35cm long), associated with permanent freshwater streams.\
\\xv An-monjalhmonjalh ku-wardde, ku-ngarre, njilhmi kure Karredjdjurle, Djorlok darnki.\
\\xe The Coleus herb grows in the rock country, in vine forests and at freshwater springs such as Karredjdjurle\
near Djorlok.\
\\sc Coleus scutellarioides\
\\uv Djnj= an-monjalhmonjalh, I, W= man-monjalhmonjalh\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx monjalnghmonjalngh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of small yam\
\\sc Ipomea abrupta\
\
\\lx morddeng\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de crush, push down with foot\
\\xv Football kabirri-dirri kabirri-djud-mordderren.\
\\xe When they play football they crush each others' necks.\
\
\\lx morden\
\\lc na-morden\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de lightning 2.mythological lightning spirit\
\\uv W\
\\xv Yi-mang kun-djila wardi na-morden ka-rrong.\
\\xe Get the axe otherwise the lightning will strike it. (It is said that axes left out in a storm will attract\
lightning strikes. fv:Na-morden/Na-marrkon the lightning spirit carries axes on parts of his body and\
causes lightning by throwing the axes with great force).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx morl\
\\ps n. insects\
\\de blowfly/blowfly maggot, exceptionally large flies which follow evil spirits.\
\
\\lx morle\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de didjeridu\
\\pde mako\
\\sy djalabu.\
\\ee Burarra fv:ngorla\
\\xv Morle ka-monhme ka-burrhnjudjme 'didjmurrng didjmurrng'.\
\\xe He has a didjeridu and blows it making the sound 'didjmurrng didjmurrng'.\
\\pde Mako ka-karrme ka-buhme 'didjmurrng didjmurrng'.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Morle Karrang\
\\ps n. prop\
\
\\lx Morle Karrang\
\\ps place n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Valley area west of the East Alligator river. The valley is said to resemble a didgeridu and the entrance to the valley its mouthpiece, hence the site name which means 'didgeridu-its-mouth'. The eastern end of the valley is around 5km west of the river and the western end opens onto the Magela Creek plain about 13km east of Jabiru airport.  \
\\xv Morle Karrang ka-bolkngeyyo... Morle yi-bengkan karri-buhme. Kumekke ka-rrang konda kure.\
\\xe Morle Karrang is the name of that place... You know, morle [didjeridu] which we play. That's where the mouthpiece [of the didjeridu] is located.\
\\sn 2\
\\re place name\
\\de Place near Kamarrkawarn outstation in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\xv Morle Karrang anu rudno karrih-re kanjdjikanjdji. Ani ka-bolkyirriyo karrkad.\
\\xe Morle Karrang is the road which we drive along down [near the river]. That place continues along on the area just above. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 5/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx morlkalk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Arum.plant\
\\re Arum plant\
\\re fi:Amorphophallus_paeoniifolius\
\\de Kind of yam with toxins that must be removed before the tuber is edible. Some Kundjeyhmi speakers say that morlkalk are the smaller tubers and the bigger ones are called fv:kamarn. Some Kundedjnjenghmi speakers say fv:morlkalk is their dialectal version of fv:kamarn.\
\\sc Amorphophallus paeoniifolius\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur W= kamarn\
\\sd plant\
\\p BAC.RA2002.0216 (rock art image confirmed by LBN to be morlkalk leaves and tuber)\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx morlomorl\
\\va morl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de exceptionally large flies which follow evil spirits.\
\\uv E.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx morlorrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de plant name, thin bush used as firestick\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx mornmorn\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge small\
\\re small (Kune)\
\\de Small\
\\xv Bolkmornmorn konda.\
\\xe This is a little area, small [named] region.\
\\nt Formative in the plant name fv:man-kodjmornmorn 'little head'\
\
\\lx morndi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sit, sleep, lie, be\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde -yo/-ni.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx morning (check retroflex.)\
\\lc kun-morning (check retroflex.)\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de scar\
\\pdn rarely used.\
\
\\lx morakanbak\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ?\
\\re unidentified plant\
\\de kind of sandstone country plant\
\\sc unidentified\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx moroworr\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fi:Petelostigma_quadriloculare\
\\re fi:Petelostigma_quadriloculare\
\\de kind of woody shrub (between 1-2m)\
\\xv An-moroworr an-kung nungan nuye.\
\\xe The fi:Petelostigma_quadriloculare shrub is a honey plant (i.e. bees collect pollen from it).\
\\sc Petalostigma quadriloculare\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur Kdj= an-karnborrkborrk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx morrangamen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de feel hot\
\\pde ladmen\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx morrbo\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.torulosa\
\\re fi:Acacia_torulosa\
\\de kind of Acacia tree\
\\ee fi:Acacia_plectocarpa and fi:Acacia_torulosa are very similar and easy to confuse with each other. However, the seed pods of the two\
trees are quite different, fi:Acacia_torulosa having much longer and narrower pods.\
\\sc Acacia torulosa\
\\sy an-mardamarda\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx morrdjdjanjkadjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr morrdjdjanj+kadjung 'song genre+follow/recite'\
\\ge sing.M.song\
\\re sing a fi:morrdjdjanjno song\
\\de sing a fv:morrdjdjanjno song\
\\xv Na-yungki nawu dabborrabbolk ba-bengkani ba-morrdjdjanjkadjungi ngarri-malakakdongi ngarri-nani ka-djamdi. \
\\xe The old people long ago knew how to sing fv:morrdjdjanjno songs. We would rise early in the morning [to sing them] and see those\
animals would be there [as a result of singing the songs].\
\\sd music\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx morrdjdjanjno\
\\ps n.\
\\mr morrdjdjanj+no\
\\ge song\
\\re song genre\
\\re increase ritual songs\
\\de a genre of clap stick (and some didjeridu) accompanied songs in the public domain, relating to animal species and associated with good\
fortune or increase ritual in hunting\
\\ng incorporable\
\\xv Dja korroko morrdjdjanjno namekke bi-bebkeyi kunj nawu, barrk djukerre. Badborng ka-karrme an-djubirlinjhbirlinj\
nungan mak morrdjdjanjno. Badborng, ka-karrme nawu nabarlek morrdjdjanjno. Nungan mak nawaran ka-karrme\
morrdjdjanjno, nayelenjyelenj namurluddjangka na-wernhkimuk, ka-karrme morrdjdjanjno. Bu korroko\
barri-morrdjdjanjkadjungi dja bolkki kayakki. Yawurrinj bolkki na-kerrnge ka-ngalme ka-wakawakwan marrek\
ka-bengkan morrdjdjanjno.\
\\xe A long time ago, the singing of fv:morrdjdjanjno songs made kangaroos such as the black wallaroo plentiful. The short-eared rock\
wallaby has the song text fv:andjumbirlilhbirlil, which is its fv:morrdjdjanjno. Both the short-eared rock wallaby and the nabarlek have\
fv:morrdjdjanjno songs. The Oenpelli python also has a fv:morrdjdjanjno song with the text fv:nayelenjyelenj but the really biggest\
python called fv:namurluddjangka also has a fv:morrdjdjanjno song. A long time people used to sing these songs, but not today. The\
young men of the new generation don't know how to sing fv:morrdjdjanjno.\
\\ee Morrdjdjanjno songs are sung in the early morning around dawn, often before going hunting. The song texts are brief and relate to\
individual natural species. Most fv:morrdjdjanjno are sung with clap stick accompaniment, but some songs relating to antilopine\
kangaroos also have didjeridu and clap stick accompaniment.\
\\sd music\
\\so Jimmy Kalarriya\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx morrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de growl (of dogs)\
\\uv E\
\\uv I = -ngerrme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx morrng\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fi:Smilax_australis\
\\re fi:Smilax_australis\
\\de kind of rambling vine\
\\sc Smilax australis\
\\sy an-morrodondolem\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur I= morrng, W= man-morrng\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx morrodondolem\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\de kind of rambling vine\
\\ge fi:Smilax_australis\
\\re fi:Smilax_australis\
\\xv An-morrodondolem kabirri-we ku-wukkukah djenj kangun bamrdek warridj.\
\\xe They throw fi:Smilax_australis berries into the water and fish eat them and so do northern snapping turtles fi:(Elseya dentata).\
\\sc Smilax australis\
\\sy an-morrng\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= an-morrng\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx morrodjornno\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de egg\
\\pde dabuno\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx morrongomolo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of grass which has a sweet juice that can be extracted by chewing\
\\sc Mneusithea rottboelioides\
\\cf see fv:mayedja\
\\dt 26/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx morruyhmorruyh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge ring-tailed.dragon\
\\re ring-tailed dragon\
\\re fi:Ctenophorus_caudicinctus\
\\de ring-tailed dragon\
\\sc fi:Ctenophorus_caudicinctus\
\\so David Garlbuma\
\\uv E, Djnj\
\\xv Morruyhmorruyh yiman kalkkalk la kuwardde ka-re.\
\\xe The ring-tailed dragon is like other two lined-dragons, but it lives in\
rock country.\
\\xv Morruyhmorruyh ngudjbang ka-lobme, madjandemed ngudjwarre ka-re.\
\\xe The ring-tailed dragon runs swiftly but Gilbert's dragon is much slower when it moves.\
\\dt 27/Jul/2010\
\
\\lx Mowalangu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re name of a clan\
\\de name of a Rembarrnga speaking fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan\
\\xv Yo Kabirlingu namekke dawurro ngadberre, kadberre. Ngal-yikBakkarda, Bakkarda Wurrbbarn-bulu, Kabirlingu\
Mowalangu Bulumbulu. Dawurro, ka-karrme ngal-nguyakimuk.\
\\xe Yes, that clan Kabirlingu is part of ours, including you [clan confederation relating to the emu]. [Others include] the Bakkarda\
fi:yikurrumu and the Wurrbbarn, Kabirlingu, Mowalangu and Bulumbulu clans. There are a big number of clans in that confederation\
for her [the emu].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx mowirn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Pacific Baza, Crested Hawk\
\\sc Aviceda subcristata\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= wirnwirnh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mowuyime\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de feel 'slack', sit quietly, unmotivated.\
\
\\lx moyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de bones lying\
\\xv Yo djulng nawu na-yungki kurrmeng bo-yak ningihni nani ka-moyo.\
\\xe Those bones lying there were placed by the first people in the time when they lived with no water.\
\
\\lx moyhmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re pick up many small items from ground\
\\de Pick up many small objects from the ground, typically fruit.\
\\xv Ngale kun-dulk ka-bun, ka-rralhme ka-mankan wanjh ka-mankan. Ka-moyhmang ka-welengngun.\
\\xe She [emu] strikes the tree [with her breast plate], she hits the tree and then the fruit falls down. She then picks up the fruit and eats it.\
\\dt 08/May/2016\
\
\\lx Mubardi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de small billabong in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\\ee Kulabbarl man-yahwurd.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Mubi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place near fv:Kumarrirnbang\
\
\\lx mud\
\\lc kun-mud\
\\va mudno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 1\
\\de body hair\
\\sn 2\
\\de feathers\
\\sn 3\
\\de animal fur\
\
\cf2 \\lx muddubbe\
\\ps adj.\
\\re hairy\
\\re furry\
\\de Hairy, with thick hair or fur.\
\\xv Nungka muddubbeni kore kunburrk nuye.\
\\xe He had thick hair all over his body.\
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 102\
\\id DK\
\\dt 30/Jul/2016\cf0 \
\
\\lx mud\
\\lc ngane-, ngarri-, karri-mud\
\\ps n.\
\\de countryman, family, relalatives\
\\xv ngane-mud\
\\xe We two are countrymen.\
\\sy karri-kadjurren\
\
\\lx Mudbubadjdji\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx mudbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge pluck.feathers\
\\re pluck feather\
\\de pluck out feathers, hair or fur.\
\\xv Yimudbun werrk yiyakwon. Wanjh murrwidno yimurrwidkinje wanjh yibebke manekke yimudkinje wanjh yibebke.\
\\xe You pluck off the feathers until finished. Then the down; you burn off the down and once you singe all the feathers then you take it out (of the fire).\
\\syn muddurrkmang\
\
\\lx muddahdadjmiken\
\\ps adj.\
\\mr\
\\ge variegated\
\\re variegated feather or fur pattern\
\\de variegated feather or fur pattern of animals, blocks of different coloured fur or feathers\
\\uv W, I, E, Djnj\
\\dt 31/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx muddika\
\\va muddikang\
\\ps n\
\\de truck, car\
\\bw from English 'motor car'\
\
\\lx Muddum\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A Wurdyaw Djang (Baby Dreaming) site in the Kudjekbinj estate. The site consists of a number of rocky outcrops on the plain just south of the outstation, west of the creek which runs past the outstation. These are in fact shelters with paintings. Along with these rock shelters, another focus of the djang are the termite mounds of the area which must not be interfered with in any way, unless you are a woman with fertility problems. This site is connected to another Baby Dreaming site nearby at Wuyhkabambuldi. The baby spirits here are said to call out.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx mudyi\
\\ps adj.\
\\de 'with fur', having fur/hair\
\\xv Ngarri-nang bebmeng kornobolo yaw mud-yi ngarri-kadjuy.\
\\xe We saw a young wallaby, it had fur, and we chased it.\
\
\\lx Mukkamukka\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place south of fv:Kakodbebuldi, popular wallaby hunting spot.\
\\ee In fv:Darnkorlo clan estate but in 'company' with Marrin.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mukolin\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate said to be inhabited by spirits of the deceased.\
\
\\lx mularra\
\\ps n.\
\\de song style for Rembarrnga performance of public diplomacy ceremonies such as fv:walk, fv:mamurrng,\
and fv:marradjiri.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mulawarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi term\
\\xv La kune ka-yime na-buyika kam-yime "Ah! wardi kun-mim yi-mang wardi mulawarre\
ka-madjyikoldan".\
\\xe And when they do this one comes to the other and says "Oh! Well get the eyes too, otherwise aunty\
will go empty handed."\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mulawarre\
\\lc ngal-mulawarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my wife, your fv:kakkak, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn ngaluka.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mulbbamh\
\\ps adj.\
\\de Squashed together, packed tightly.\
\\xv Yun mulbbamh ngurri-bimbun, ngurri-wok-yalarrke.\
\\xe Don't write all squashed up, spread your words out.\
\\uv I\
\
\\lx mulbbu\
\\ps n.\
\\re small mammals\
\\de Generic term for various small dasyurid and other similar small mammals such as delicate mouse, Kakadu pebble mouse, fawn antechinus, sandstone false antechinus, grassland melomys, the common rock rat and the brush-tailed rabbit-rat. Some speakers also call some of these small mammals fv:djirrkkinj or in Kune fv:bob.\
\\sc Pseudomys delicatus, Pseudomys calabyi, Antechinus bellus, Pseudatechinus bilarni, Melomys burtoni, Zyzomys argurus, Conilurus penicillatus\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mulbbuy\
\\lc kun-mulbbuy\
\\ps n.\
\\de meat\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-kanj\
\\xv Kabirri-mulbbuy-yakwan.\
\\xe They are eating meat.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx mulbirrk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fi:Curculigo_ensifolia\
\\re fi:Curculigo_ensifolia\
\\de kind of edible tuber available in fv:bangkerreng 'late wet season'\
\\sc Curculigo ensifolia\
\\uv Kdj\
\\uv Djdj= anburda, andjay\
\\sy Djnj= andjay\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx mulebe\
\\lc na-mulebe\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my fv:mamamh, your elder brother, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn berlunghkowarre\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mulebe\
\\lc ngal-mulebe\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my daughter's daughter, your sister, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn ngaldjum.\
\\sn 2\
\\de My mother, your sister, you are my uncle.\
\\cn molonghkowarre\
\\sn 3\
\\de My fv:kakkak, your sister, we call each other fv:kakkak.\
\\cn berlekowurd.\
\\sn 4\
\\de My fv:kakkak, your sister, you are my male fv:kakkak.\
\\cn ngundikoydoy.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx mulewan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de relate information, tell, inform\
\\xv Kabirri-marne-mulewarren.\
\\xe They tell each other.\
\\xv Nangale mulewam?\
\\xe Who related that news?\
\\xv Kano warde mulewan.\
\\xe Give it to me or else I'll tell on you.\
\
\\lx mulil\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial feast. At the completion of most large regional ceremonies, the public proceedings conclude with a large meal that everyone shares in.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mulil-mang\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stage a ceremonial feast\
\
\\lx mulkanjno\
\\pref\
\\va kun-mulkanj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge inner.bark\
\\re inner bark of tree\
\\de inner bark of trees, especially fi:Acacia_difficilis\
\\xv Mulkanjno an-djoh arri-yirrmi an-kung arri-barungi arri-nguni.\
\\xe We used to strip off the inner bark of fi:Acacia_difficilis and soak up the honey to eat it.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Mulkkayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate\
\\ee "Karrikad Mankorlod beh, man-dulum ka-rri."\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx muludji\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de fruit of giant cabbage palm\
\\sc fruit of Corypha elata\
\\ee sacred site and large stand of this palm at fv:Yimayhyirud on Liverpool River.\
\\sy kulwirri\
\
\\lx mulun\
\\lc kun-mulun\
\\va mulunno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de scar\
\\sy kun-mok-kare\
\
\\lx mulurrum\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_leptocarpa\
\\re wattle tree sp.\
\\de Wattle sp. Has an edible gum.\
\\sc Acacia leptocarpa\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 17/Feb/2014\
\
\\lx muluru\
\\lc kun-muluru\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de stick, wood\
\\sn 2\
\\de pipe for smoking\
\\xv Kan-weybu kun-muluru nga-mimalawme.\
\\pde Kano badj nga-wungme.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde 1.kun-dulk, 2. badj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx muluymuluy\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spoonbill\
\\re spoonbill\
\\de Spoonbill.\
\\sc Platalea flavipes and regia\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W, Djnj= kebbaldjurri\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 27/Mar/2014\
\
\\lx mulwon\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de conceal knowledge, not tell about something\
\
\\lx Mumeka\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Outstation on the Kurulk clan estate. Mumeka is really the name for an area on the\
western side of the Mann river. The outstation is on the east side.\
\\uv I\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mumenkerr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:na-mirwi clan estate.\
\
\\lx Mumenkerr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate, large billabong, seasonal camp. Birth place of Frewa Bardaluna.\
\
\\lx Mumulngord\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Barabba clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Mundarn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de Name of an extinct Amurdak patriclan on the lower East Alligator River near Imakirrk (Turkey Dreaming) and further north.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 22/May/2007\
\
\\lx mundjum\
\\lc kun-mundjum\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de shoulder\
\\pde kun-karlang.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx munhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de have, hold\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde karrme.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx munke-\
\\ps incorp. secondary predicate\
\\de \'91moving away + specific qualifying action\'92\
\
\\lx munkebalanhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re fall down as moving off\
\\de Fall down or trip in the process of leaving or moving away from someone.\
\\xv Kan-munkebalanhme.\
\\xe He fell down in front of us as he was leaving.\
\\dt 19/Sep/2016\
\
\\lx munkebun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de send OBJ out\
\\xv Barri-woknani barri-djalmunkebuni barri-nani ka-yawoyhbebme.\
\\xe They used to sing out [ritually to the honey spirit being] and send it out and it would come back again.\
\
\\lx munkekadjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de follow after, follow someone's leading or direction, follow the style or example of another.\
ngad karrimunkekadjnng namekke bininj\
\
\\lx munkemang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re follow after someone when they go past\
\\de Follow after someone as they go past or move away.\
\\xv Kabirriwarlbun kumekke nungan kani yarrkka kayo wanjh kabirrimre kabirriyurrhke, wanjh kabenmunkemang, kabenmunkemang wanjh kabenkadjung.\
\\xe When people go hunting, he [the gecko] can be anywhere, and when they pass him he follows them. \
\\so Nganjmirra, Nawakadj, \'91Kunwinjku Spirit\'92, Melbourne University Press, 1997, p. 84\
\\id DK\
\\dt 30/Jul/2016\
\
\\lx munkenan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re watch OBJ go\
\\de Watch something go, watch something depart\
\
\\lx munkewe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de send\
\
\\lx munmunh\
\\va man-munmunh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de grass species, a small spear grass\
\\xv dabborrabbolk birri-nguneng man-munmun nawu kun-ronj-yak birrih-ni, wanjh birri-nunj-wukmeng yiman kun-ronj.\
\\xe The old people used to eat fv:man-munmun when there was no water and chewing the grass would produce spittle that they could swallow.\
\\xv Munmunh kornobolo ka-ngun.\
\\xe Agile wallabies eat fv:munmunh grass.\
\\sc Chrysopogon fallax\
\\de E\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx munun\
\\ps adj.\
\\de dark, without light\
\\xv Bolk-munun minj nga-nan.\
\\xe It's a dark place, I can't see.\
\
\\lx mungbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de stay a long time\
\\xv Nga-mungburren.\
\\xe I'm staying here for a long time.\
\\xv Kurrurldul yi-beng kah-yo Balang, la kaddum yo djang kah-di ku-bolk djamun kumekke ben-djal-bom bonj ben-kudjihmeng 'and' bebmeng man-kuladj manih ka-yo bonj ben-mungbom, yo, wanjh bonj munguyh-munguyh kabene-ni bene-marnburrinj ngalyod.\
\\xe It's a sacred place there where she killed and kept those two, and now there are swamp panjees (corms of Eleocharis dulcis), there where she has kept those two. Now there they stay forever and they now have turned into dreaming. They have turned themselves into rainbow serpents.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx mungkurl-mungkurl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de pied heron\
\\sc Ardea picata\
\
\\lx mungu\
\\ps interj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de oops sorry, said to excuse oneself for unintentional mistakes eg. bump into someone\
\\sn 2\
\\de said as an expression of uncertainty or when surmising\
\\xv Yikawi ka-re ka-rrangen Daddubbe bad ka-rurrk nungan ngarr-wakwan ngarr-nan mungu\
ngarr-yime.\
\\xe Only sometimes Daddubbe [the severed leg spirit] moves about and stops but where it lives inside a\
cave, we don't know, we can only surmise about where we might see it.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx munguyh\
\\ps adv.\
\\ng Not incorporable.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge extended\
\\re extended (length, time)\
\\de Extended (length or time)\
\\sn 2\
\\ge repeated\
\\re repeated (action)\
\\de Repeated action.\
\\xv Ngarri-kayi ka-lerrngbak. Ngarri-kukkurrmi ngarri-yawoyhreyi ngarri-nani ka-djamdi lerrngbak ngarri-kukkurrmi munguyh.\
\\xe We would carry them [speared kangaroos], whack [sound of spear hitting the kangarooo]. We'd put the bodies down and go off again and when we saw another one standing 'whack' we'd spear it and put the body aside and keep going repeating this.\
\\cf munguyh-munguyh\
\\ce forever, for a long time, permanent\
\\xv Bu kabokurrungbun mane kadjalboyo bu munguyhmunguyh marrek mak ka-bukmen.\
\\xv If the water is described as fv:ka-bokurrungbun that means that the water lies there permanently and it never dries up.\
\
\\lx munjud\
\\lc kun-munjud\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de nape, back of neck\
\\pde kun-djud.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx murdbu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de skirt made from bark fibre of fv:man-budbud Brachychiton paradoxum.\
\\xv Murdbu birri-dabkerremeninj dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe Our ancestors used to cover themselves with bark fibre skirts.\
\
\\lx murdurdu\
\\ps n. insect\
\\de small mud wasp\
\\ee yirridjdja.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx murla\
\\sd kinship\
\\ps n.\
\\de mother's older sisters (MeZ)\
\\xv Ngale murla yi-wo kalngbuyh ngudda ka-yimarnewanj-ngun.\
\\xe Give it to your mother's older sister, you're under ceremonial restriction, it is her private food (cannot\
share it with younger people).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx murlbardme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hop (certain macropod species specific only), refers only to fv:wolerrk, fv:nadjinem, and fv:djukerre,\
(female euro, and black rock kangaroos both male and female).\
\\xv Ka-ben-kuk-kan wanjh ka-ben-yilkan ka-kolung kare kabirri-dolkan ka-murlbardme\
djukerre and ka-ben-djurlhme kabi-djurlhme mimih nuye, ya.\
\\xe They carry them around and they slide over their bodies and climb down and go and female Black\
Wallaroos hop around and grab hold of mimih to waken them, these are the mimih's own, yes.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Murlk-wah\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Karadjdjarrngu clan estate\
\\uv D, E\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx murlmu\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Melaleuca.sp.\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_cajuputi\
\\re fi:Melaleuca_leucadendra\
\\de weeping paperbark tree\
\\xv Bolkki ngarr-wam Balngalngkunj kumekke yi-nang an-murlmu ba-wohdadjmeng?\
\\xe Today you and I went to Balngangkunj, did you see that weeping paperbark tree there which had snapped off half way up?\
\\sc Melaleuca cajuputi, Melaleuca leucadendra\
\\sy mamomo\
\\uv Djnj, I, E\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx murlurdum\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.plectocarpa\
\\re fi:Acacia_plectocarpa\
\\de kind of Acacia tree\
\\xv An-murlurdum ka-mirnderri.\
\\xe There are many fi:Acacia_plectocarpa trees (here).\
\\ee fi:Acacia_plectocarpa and fi:Acacia_torulosa are very similar and easy to confuse with each other. However, the seed pods of the two\
trees are quite different, fi:Acacia_torulosa having much longer and narrower pods.\
\\sc Acacia plectocarpa\
\\uv Kdj, Djnj\
\\ur Djnj syn.= an-birdarrbirdarr\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx murlurr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de a mangrove\
\\sc Ceriops tagal var. australis, Ceriops tagal var. tagal\
\
\\lx murnakkadidj\
\\ps n.\
\\de type of person who is feared as being dangerous, 'a killer'.\
\\xv Murnakkadidj nabang birri-kengemen bininj.\
\\xe People are afraid of a dangerous person.\
\
\\lx murndemang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de perform sorcery on someone to kill them\
\\xv Mardayin na-bang kabirri-danjburren daluk kabirri-bun bininj, kabi-kodjekmang\
kabi-danjbun o kabi-murndemang.\
\\xe The Mardayin ceremony is dangerous and people spear each other, women or men and kidnap\
someone and spear them or do sorcery on them.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx murndikan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge carry.bag\
\\re carry bag from neck\
\\de Carry a bag around the neck with the bag hanging down on the back and the string or handle around the neck.\
\\xv Ka-murndikan, ku-djurd ka-kurrme namekke yi-na ku-djurd.\
\\xe She\'92s carrying it behind her head, at the back of her neck she has put it, behind the neck, look.\
\\p BulurrB.Ian.Munro.16\
\\dt 15/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx Murndol\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Placename near Bolkdjam outstation\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx murnubbarr\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge magpie.goose\
\\re magpie goose\
\\re fi:Anseranus_semipalmata\
\\de Magpie goose, pied goose.\
\\xv Murnubbarr djang kumekke darnki Midjuyh.\
\\xe There is a magpie goose dreaming place there near Midjuyh.\
\\sc Anseranus semipalmata\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\pdn kk = karlko\
\\uv W=manimunak, Kdj = bamurru\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx murnubbarr\
\\ge dance.style\
\\re dance style of Burarra people\
\\de Dance style name, belonging to Burarra and other eastern groups.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx murnun\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de dugong\
\\sy marndingunjngunj.\
\\xv Murnun minj ka-weldi. Kun-berd nuye kun-marung karri-ngeybun 'miri'.\
\\xe Dugongs have no 'wings' (fins). In Mawng language we call its tail an 'oar' (fv:miri).\
\
\\lx murnungu\
\\lc na-/ngal-murnungu\
\\ps n.\
\\de 'the one who did it', eg. the murderer, the right one, person responsible\
\
\\lx Murnwarri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Kunwinjku patriclan in Western Arnhem Land\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx murul\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de evil spirit in Kune mythology who killed the two wives of the hero Bumabuma.\
\\xv Bine-wam daluk djarrkno bine-nguneng, murul binbom berrewoneng.\
\\xe Two women went out to eat, but Murul killed them both.\
\
\\lx Murumburr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan in Kakadu National Park\
\\xv A: Woh, Anbarrawarrku. Na-ngamed ka-yo kurenj. B: Bolk-Murumburr? A: Woh kume Murumburr. Nakka\
nganabbarru kah-dulubun na-ngamed David\
\\xe A: Yes, Anbarrawarrku. Whatsisname lives there. B: A Murumburr clan place? A: Yes, Murumburr. That bloke who shoots buffalo,\
whatsisname, David.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Murran\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a coastal Iwaidja patriclan in north-west Arnhem Land\
\\ee This name is cognate with the Bininj Kunwok clan name fv:Murrwan, but the clan referred to as fv:Murrwan is a separate\
(geographically and genealogically) entity from fv:Murran.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx murrangamen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de the drying out of plant matter, the transformation of plants from green to dead brown.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dalehmen\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx murrbuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear type, has large barbs running down one side of the head.\
\
\\lx murridjke\
\\va murridjdje\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de break\
\\pde bakke\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx murridjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de break\
\\pde bakme\
\\ee Dalabon fv:murridj 'break'.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx murrikang\
\\va murrika, muddikang\
\\ps n.\
\\re car, vehicle\
\\de Motor vehicle, car, truck.\
\\xv \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Wanjh ngarringarrngmang mane kaluk murrikang ngalengman kuri kalobme\
\\xe So we take the same route as motor vehicles use along there.\
\\dt 11/Nov/2016\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\\lx murrimurridjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de break into many pieces\
\\pde bakabakme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Murrkana\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan\
\\xv Yo na-yikmurrkanani Kodjok, Namilhlurlni bi-bornang ngaye ngarduk modjarrkdoybun, ngarridj nawu Milhlurlni.\
Nani nawu police boy djal marrek ba-balkayhmeninj policeman kayakki. \
\\xe Yes, he was a member of the Murrkana clan, Kodjok [subsection], Namilhlurlni [his name] was his father, he was my cross-cousin in a\
skewed relationship, the son of Ngarridj Milhlurlni. He was a police boy who never called the (non-Aboriginal) police for assistance,\
no.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 21/May/2007\
\
\\lx murrng\
\\lc kun-murrng\
\\va murrngno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de bone\
\\xv Kaluk nga-murrng-name.\
\\xe After I'll put the bones on (a painting).\
\
\\lx murrnglurlmeng\
\\ps n. (verbal)\
\\de swelling (caused by broken bone)\
\
\\lx murrwid\
\\pr kun\
\\va murrwidno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge down\
\\re down (of feathers)\
\\de Down of feathers on birds.\
\\xv Yimudbun werrk yiyakwon. Wanjh murrwidno yimurrwidkinje wanjh yibebke manekke yimudkinje wanjh yibebke.\
\\xe You pluck off the feathers until finished. Then the down; you burn off the down and once you singe all the feathers then you take it out (of the fire).\
\\dt 01/Sep/2012\
\
\\lx murru\
\\ps n.\
\\re black flying-fox\
\\de Black flying fox. Associated with fv:duwa moiety.\
\\sc Pteropus alecto\
\\ur Kdj= nangamu\
\\pdn kk= djingkorrk\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx murrukurl\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_latescens\
\\de kind of acacia tree\
\\sy an-bongka\
\\sc Acacia latescens\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur ?\
\\sd plant\
\\p Acacia latescens.2rock, Acacia latescens.2Jabiru.jpg [as for an-bongka entry]\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx murrulak\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.dimidiata\
\\re fi:Acacia_dimidiata\
\\de kind of acacia tree\
\\sc Acacia dimidiata\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx Murrwan\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de clan name for a number of groups both coastal and inland. The coastal clan groups are referred to as fv:Murran (in Iwaidja and Mawng) and the two inland fv:Murrwan groups are associated with two extinct languages, one being referred to as fv:Murrwan_Mengerrdji and the other fv:Murrwan_Urningangk.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 13/Apr/2011\
\
\\lx muyungu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de plant used as a fish poison, unidentified\
\\uv E.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nabadbirrem\
\\ps n.\
\\re rock lizard species\
\\re fi:Varanus_baritji\
\\de Rock lizard species.\
\\sc Varanus baritji\
\\uv I\
\\ur E, Kdj= birrem\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Nabadbulanj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Nabalakodbo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de the area in fv:Marrin clan estate where the fv:Kurrukkurrh or Table Hill airstrip is today located.\
\
\\lx Nabalakododji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Marrin clan estate\
\
\\lx Nabandji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx Nabang\
\\va Nabrang\
\\va Nabarng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\mr na- 'noun class prefix'+ bang 'dangerous'\
\\ge placename\
\\re estate name\
\\de place or estate name for large regional area in drainage basin which flows from the west into the upper Cadell River\
\\xv Nabrang manekke kam-djalyirriyo bad Nabrang ngarri-yime kubolkyahwurd.   BN: Bad kanjdji ankabo darran\
na-Warihngu nuye kunred country, ngamed Boburrk. \
\\xe X:Nabrang lies in line [next to Waridjngu country] but Nabrang is a small region.   Y: But downstream of some creek(s)\
that\'92sWaridjngu country at Boburrk [another regional estate name].\
\\sd estate\
\\so JK, LBN\
\\uv W= Nabang\
\\ur I, E= Nabrang, Nabarng\
\\dt 20/Apr/2007\
\\co This is the automatic anti-crash field. Do  not take any notice of this field which apparently needs to be of some considerable length.\
\
\\lx Nabarlbbahken\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place name on fv:Nakkorrkko ancestor travel route.\
\
\\lx nabarlek\
\\ps n.\
\\re nabarlek rock wallaby\
\\re fi:Peradorcus_concinna\
\\de Nabarlek (also known as the little rock wallaby).\
\\sc Peradorcus concinna\
\\pdn kk = dolhwarr\
\
\\lx Nabarlekidyo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kurulk clan estate, site of duwa Namorrorddo dreaming.\
\
\\lx Nabarrbinworrkminj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate with rock shelters and rock art.\
\
\\lx nabbolo\
\\cf see fv:-bbolo\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nabe\
\\ps dem.\
\\ge him.there\
\\re him just there\
\\de Him just there. That male referent close by.\
\
\\lx Naberdengkelk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kodwalewale estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx nabirriwarnngu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de spirit figures who are attributes with painting rock art and belonging to the category of beings\
described as fv:namomoyak.\
\\uv E.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nabiwo\
\\ps n.\
\\de A type of wild honey often found in the ground, produced by native stingless bees identified as fv:Tetragonula mellipes\
\\pdn kk = bardmarneyi\
\\uv I, W, Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur E= modjarnh\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Nabobererre\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kune/Dangbon country but have not identified clan affiliation. Possibly fv:Balngarra clan.\
\\uv Kune/Dangbon\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx naboddarrke\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de honey type, found in rock\
\\pde man-yalk\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Nabokarlbayi\
\\va Namokarlbayi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Place name, the exact name and location are uncertain. Nabokarlbayi has been documented a few kilometres east of Kundjalerri Kayo near the upper East Alligator River, and would mean 'The water with yellow ochre in it'. Namokarlbayi however has been documented near the eastern face of Djidbidjidbi (Mount Brockman) and would mean 'the bone with yellow ochre on it'. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Nabokkudji\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Bolkngok estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Naborlhborlh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de the name of a man in Kuninjku recent history (father of Mamarriyangu at Manmoyi) who as a\
fv:na-kordang is credited with capturing and riding on the head of a rainbow serpent, driving it from\
Dilebang to Milmilngkan.\
\\xv Ngalyod bom kumekke ngalyod, bom and 'magic man' birri-mey nangamed nani\
Naborlhborlh.\
\\xe He killed a rainbow serpent there, killed it, the magic man, whatsisname, Naborlhborlh.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx naborlhnadjerre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de name for agile wallaby in Kundedjwarre clan lect which is spoken by the Kurulk clan of the Mann\
River region. This word is also called out by Kurulk clan hunters as it is believed that by doing so the\
wallabies will not hide themselves from the hunter.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nabowirlih\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de flowers of Melaleuca spp. such as M. leucadendra\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx Nabulyukabim\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name Kumarrirnbang Creek region\
\\de Small rocky hill in the Kumarrirnbang estate. It lies on the main walking route between Kumarrirnbang Creek (Mibarra waterhole) and Ngalurdbirrhmi gorge which leads west to Maburrinj. Nabulyukabim is about 4km east of Ngalurdbirrhmi in a winding creek gorge which heads down to Berddolkko. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx naburrma\
\\ps n.\
\\ge heron\
\\re great billed heron\
\\re fi:Ardea_sumatrana\
\\de great billed heron\
\\sc Ardea sumatrana\
\\sd bird\
\\sd 20/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx nadedjmorle\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge clan.interj\
\\re clan interjection for Durlmangkarr clan\
\\de One of the two fv:kundangwok clan interjections for the Durlmangkarr clan, the other being fv:dorrek. Pronounced fv:narredjmorle.\
\\sd kun-dangwok\
\\dt 31/Mar/2008 \
\
\\lx nadjakkorrongko\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de king brown snake\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dadbe\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx nadjardawo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de whirlwind\
\\uv E= nawurlam, bidj\uc0\u729 rru\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Nadjardenj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A rock sticking up on the top of the escarpment line above the east bank of the Goomadeer River at Kunyikuymi. This represents Nadjardenj, the older brother of Nanjiwk the orphan who together with Nadjardenj were consumed by the rainbow serpent after Nanjiwk cried.\uc0\u8232 \\cf Nanjiwk\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx nadjarrbanj\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de stink (decaying or rotting substances).\
\\pde -nudbanj\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx nadjarrmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de rot, decay\
\\pde nudmen\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx nadjarrno\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de rotting substance\
\\pde nudno\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Nadjarrukken\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place on Mann River south-west of Mumeka in fv:na-kurulk estate near Kubarledjawoy.\
\
\\lx nadjik\
\\va djik\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Australian owlet-nightjar\
\\re owlet-nightjar, Australian\
\\de Australian owlet-nightjar\
\\xv Nadjik kokbabi, mimbabi, kan-nahnan. Ku-rrulk ka-yo, djik djik djik\
ka-yime.\
\\xe The Australian owlet-nightjar is always looking around, watching, staring at us continually. it lives in the hollows of trees and calls out 'djik djik djik'.\
\\ee The Australian owlet-nightjar is sometimes misidentified as fv:lablab 'large-tailed nightjar and spotted nightjar'. Some speakers will use the name fv:lablab to refer to all three nightjars found in western Arnhem Land.\
\\sd bird\
\\so LBN\
\\dint Djnj\
\\sc Aegotheles cristatus\
\\bb Pizzey & Knight 1997:310, 311; Morcombe 2000:202, 203\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx nadjinem\
\\ps n.\
\\ge black.wallaroo\
\\re black rock wallaroo (male)\
\\de Male black rock wallaroo. The female is called fv:djukerre\
\\ee The mythical black wallaroo man fv:Nadjinem, has a pet dog called fv:Djabarraboy. At night the fv:mimih spirits call out its name 'Djabarraboy, Djabarraboy'.\
\\sc Macropus bernadus\
\\uv I\
\\ur W, E, Kdj= barrk\
\\pdn kk = njamlurruk, na-njamlurruk\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Nadjiningken\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Mandedjkadjang estate.\
\
\\lx Nadjiri Kani\
\\ps n. prop.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de place in Kamarrakawarn estate\
\
\\lx nadjirrkku\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Sail-fin glass fish and other species of glassfish\
\\sc Ambassis agrammus, Ambassis mulleri and Ambassis macleayi.\
\\sy beddem\
\\pde REM= murrdjdjul\
\
\\lx Nadjurrk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de This site is on a small tributary of the upper branch of Mandedjkadjung Creek (Muralidbar Creek), about 6km due south of Demed Hill. It is an important and dangerous djang (Dreaming) for a malevolent force described by Jimmy Kalarriya as either a Rainbow Serpent or \'91Bininj\'92. At any rate it is regarded as extremely dangerous and no one should ever go there otherwise their smell would remain there and raise the ire of Nadjurrk, causing possible disasters such as a tempest or cyclonic winds. The focus of the site is an exposed creek bank of red soil. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx nahnan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Look after, watch over, care for, look out for.\
\
\\lx Nakadangkuyeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate near Mann River.\
\
\\lx Nakalarramba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Kuninjku name for country on the mouth of the Liverpool River opposite Maningrida settlement. This\
is Kunbarlang country. Spelt fv:Nagalarramba using Kunbarlang orthography.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Nakarndja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mythological ancestor of Kela subsection who along with the woman Buluwana and a man of Wamud\
subsection called Nakkarrina, were all killed by the Deaf Adder ancestor at a site in Kurulk clan estate\
called Ngandarrayo. Today they remain in the form of stone at this site.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nakar\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de salt water fish species\
\
\\lx Nakarriken\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Two remnant anbinik fi:Allosyncarpia_ternata forests in the Yanjkobarnem estate. These are just south of the headwaters of the upper western Goomadeer on the escarpment, however the water flows east from here in the direction of Kabulwarnamyo outstation. The outstation is about 28 kilometres to the east. Nakarriken means \'91western/being in the west\'92. There is a spring at the edge of this forest with water flowing out of the ground. Anbinik forests such as these are said to have an abundance of honey hives in them.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx nakayalak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge brown.flying.fox\
\\re little red flying fox\
\\re fi:Pteropus scapulatus\
\\de Little red flying fox.\
\\sc Pteropus scapulatus\
\\pdn kk =djingkorrk\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt10/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx Nakebberberk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djok clan estate.\
\
\\lx nakerdmi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\sn 1\
\\de black bream\
\\sc Hephaestus fuliginosus,\
\\sn 2\
\\de Jenkin's grunter\
\\sc Hephaestus jenkinsi\
\\sy dunbuhmanj\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= dunbuhmanj\
\\ee the name fv:nakerdmi is sometimes used also in the Kuninjku dialect as a name for very large\
specimens of the black bream.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nakeryi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Eel-tailed Catfish\
\\lit 'having spikes'\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde bikkurr/marrngunj.\
\\uv cf. Djnj ordinary register= nakerdmi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Nakerremelmel\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Creek and traditional camping area in a valley at the western end of the Kabenedurhdurni gorge, above the Goomadeer River to the west. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Nakiwkkani\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de popular fishing place on a billabong in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate, good wallaby hunting area.\
\
\\lx nakka\
\\ps pron.\
\\de he/it\
\
\\lx Nakkarraddji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Nakkarrina\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mythological ancestor of Wamud subsection who along with his sister Buluwana and a man of Kela\
subsection called Nakarndja, were all killed by the Deaf Adder ancestor at a site in Kurulk clan estate\
called Ngandarrayo. Today they remain in the form of stone at this site.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Nakkorro\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate, seasonal camp on the Mann River\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx nakkorro\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de most sharks particularly River Whaler Shark\
\\sc Carcharhinus spp.\
\\pdn kk = djangarrakornam\
\
\\lx Nakkorrodolkkang\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Site on Mann River south of Kubumi. Na-kulmarru estate.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Nakodjok Kayirrkberneldjerrkdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A hill in Maburrinj  estate, a fv:mankodjbang djang (fi:Aponogeton_elongatus Dreaming) site. The place name means \'91Nakodjok has his dilly bag hanging over his shoulder.\'92 It is located around 5km east of the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 and \'91Goomadeer\'92 branches of the Goomadeer River. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Nakorlk Kayo\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on walking route from Mokmek to Mibarlwarra. There is a small billabong there, about a kilometre south of Mibarlwarra near the Liverpool River.\
\\xv An-dem ka-rri Nakorlk Kayo.\
\\xe There are water lilies at Nakorlk Kayo.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 31/March/2013\
\
\\lx Nakorlowonj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in fv:Ngolkwarre estate with two billabongs, one large, one small. Brolgas are said to place their eggs there.\
\\xv Nakorlowonj bokenh manlabbarl, labbarlkimuk dja labbarlyahwurd. Ngalkordo wirlarrk kurrmi.\
\\xe At Nakorlowonj there are two billabongs,  one large and one small. Brolgas used to put their eggs there.\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx nakornborrh\
\\ps n.\
\\de juvenile fi:Macropus_agilis or agile wallaby\
\\dv Kornobolo yaw\
\
\\lx nakorrkko\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de two mythological creation beings, a father and son (bulanj and kodjok).\
\\ee These two beings are of utmost importance in Bininj Kun-wok mythology. They are\
the founders for Bininj Kun-wok culture and ceremonial revelation. Their travels\
through Iwaidja, Kun-barlang, Ndj\'e9bbana, Bininj Kun-wok, Rembarrnga and\
Dalabon country produced various features of the landscape and cultural practice\
present today.\
\\xv Na-korrkko bene-wam bene-ngeykurrmeng yikurrumu.\
\\xe The fv:Nakorrkko father and son ancestors went along naming the fv:Yikurrumu\
clans (special ritual names for patri-clans).\
\\xv Nakorrkko nawu kodjbangni Bulanj Kodjok, Namuranjinji kornkumo,\
Namolnjinji beywurd, ngamed kun-red bani-reyi Nabang bani-reyi.\
\\xe The Nakorrkko were wild men, Bulanj and Kodjok subsections, the father's name\
was Namuranjinji and the son was Namolnjinji. The travelled to that place, whatsit,\
Nabang.\
\\dt 15/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx Nakorrmohkorrmo\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site on the western side of the Goomadeer. The name refers to one of the ancestral dogs associated with the Kabbari complex.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Nakulhmu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place on south side of Mukkamukka.\
\
\\lx nakurdakurda\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de a very large agile wallaby\
\\sc Macropus agilis (large individual)\
\\dv Kornobolo na-kimukken.\
\
\\lx nakurl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de the very last storms of the wet season, 'knock'em downs'\
\
\\lx nalangak\
\\va narlangak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge frilled-neck\
\\re frilled-neck lizard\
\\re fi:Chlamydosaurus_kingii\
\\de Frilled-neck lizard\
\\sc Chlamydosaurus kingii\
\\pdn kk= marrawawa\
\\en duwa\
\\uv E, W, Kdj\
\\ur Kdj synonym= kundamen\
\\ur I= danngarr\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Nalawengkarri\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de sacred place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate (but shared with fv:Boborerre Gurrgoni clan) where spirits of\
the deceased are said to reside.\
\\ee Waralno ngarri-di.\
\\xe Our spirits are there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nalkbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de cry, weep\
\\cf Nalkiduhdurndi.\
\\ce He went back crying.\
\
\\lx namakkawarrinj\
\\ps n.\
\\re catfish sp.\
\\re Salmon catfish\
\\re fi:Neoarius_graeffei\
\\re fi:Neoarius_leptaspis\
\\de Two species of salmon (or \'91fork-tailed\'92) catfish, the more common being fi:Neoarius_graeffei.\
\\sc Neoarius graeffei, Neoarius leptaspis\
\\uv fv:na-Djalama clan lect.\
\\ur Kdj= almakkawarri, W= manmakkawarri, ngalmakkawarri\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx namalbalayi\
\\ps n.\
\\de a person who is being chased or sought but cannot be caught.\
\\xv Minj na-ngale ngan-djorrmang ngayi warreh nga-koybang, namalbalayi ngayi.\
\
\\lx Namanwirdmi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate on the Mann River near Yikarrakkal outstation and next to the site Kabadyorrkbun.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx namanjwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\lit fv:na-manj-warre masc.n.pref+taste+bad\
\\de Saltwater Crocodile\
\\sc Crocodylus porosus\
\\pdn kk = ngandjakdjalarrk\
\
\\lx namardaka\
\\ps n.\
\\ge catfish.spp.\
\\re eel-tailed catfish sp.\
\\re fi:Neosilurus_spp.\
\\de Black eel-tailed catfishes.\
\\sc Neosilurus spp., egs. Neosilurus ater, Neosilurus argenteus, Neosilurus hyrtlii, |fs\{but also\} Cinetodus froggatti, Anodontiglanis\
dahli.\
\\uv W\
\\ur Djnj, I, E= bikkurr\
\\ee Some speakers say that big black ones are fv:namardaka (other dialects= fv:bikkurr) and are fi:yirridjdja moiety. The smaller white ones are called fv:marrngunj and are fi:duwa moiety.\
\\xv Nani ka-yime djenj kumekke ka-rrangdi namak, arrih-mang wakkidj ka-yime bad nungka namekke ka-munkewe djidjnguk. Marrek njale nungka ka-munkewe djal nungka djidjnguk nani. Djenj nuye Nomo kunj nomo mayh njalehnjale ka-ngun kayakki, djal nanin, djenj ka-ngun. Namardaka, bikkurr bad, ngad arri-yime. Kune ngudda yi-wokdi ngaye Dedjnjengh, wanjh ngayime \'91bikkurr\'92 ngaye, ngudda mak yi-yime \'91marrngunj bikkurr\'92. \
\\xe We might like to think, \'91oh the fishing\'92s good today, we\'92re doing well with our catch\'92 but really it is thanks to the grace of Djidjnguk who sends the fish to us. There is no other reason for our success in fishing, but it\'92s only Djidjnguk who causes us to catch fish. He is only concerned with fish and doesn\'92t eat other meat such as kangaroos. Here there are [paintings of] eel-tailed catfish which the Kunwinjku dialect people call fv:namardaka but I call fv:bikkurr and you who speak Kune might call them \'91fv:marrngunj or fv:bikkurr\'92.\
\\pdn nakeryi\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 03/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx Namardan Kardayi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Area of open bushland near the west bank of the Goomadeer River, about 11km southwest of Mamardawerre outstation. There was an outstation built here by Thomson Yulidjiri in the 1970s. Alf Wilson from Gunbalanya helped bring corrugated iron out, some of which can still be seen on the ground. Nearby there is a turnoff to Kabbari on the Mandilbareng track. The area was used as a base for the performance of the Ubarr ceremony at nearby Milerrelerre, and was also a Mardayin ceremony place.\uc0\u8232 \\xv Mardayin ba-djurledi Namardan Kardayi.\u8232 \\xe There was a sacred shade shelter for the Mardayin ceremony at Namardan Kardayi.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx namardbe\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spirit.being\
\\re malevolent spirit being\
\\de Malevolent spirit being.\
\\ee The word is formative in the expression fv:namardbe_kabiwe 'to have an epileptic fit' which literally means 'he/she is thrown by a bad spirit'.\
\\sd spirit being\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx namarddemo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Water Lily with brownish flower. 'fv:wayuk white and yellow flower, fv:namarddemo little bit brown flower.'\
\\so (B.B-B.)\
\\sc Nyphaea sp.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Namarladjdja\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Flat rock area by an eastern tributary of the East Alligator River, a traditional site for cutting spears. Namarladjdja is about 5km east of the confluence with the East Alligator River at Kundjalerri Kayo, in turn around 47km southeast (upstream) of Cahill's Crossing. An Ancestral child is said to have cried here when he was only given a little bit of food (fv:marladj \'91orphan\'92).\
\\xv Namarladjdja, you see that djambuddano there, that Namarladjdja now banalkbuni wurdyaw, bayalkeyinj anme anyahwurd, barriwoni.\
\\xe You see that flat rock area there, that's Namarladjdja. That [Ancestral] child cried there, they only gave him a little bit of food.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx namarnde\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spirit.being\
\\re malevolent spirit being\
\\de Profane spirit, malevolent spirit.\
\\sd mythology\
\
\\lx Namarnde Djikkarrwun\
\\va Namarnde Kadjikkangun\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de This is part of the Kadjamankayhmi complex, where the namarnde \'91profane spirit being\'92 drank milk from its mother. The site is marked with an expanse of flat light coloured rock at the base of the main scarp.\uc0\u8232 \\cf Kadjamankayhmi\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 18/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Namarnde Kalurlkan\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de This site is part of the Kabbari complex and consists of a large exposed section of rock on the cliff face of the plateau where the Goomadeer flows out of the escarpment at Kunyikuymi. There are some rock overhangs there. Literally means \'91Ghost, He-swollen-carries.\'92\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Namarnde Kani\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Placename in Kodwalewale estate\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Namarnde Kangolkarrme\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge Ghost_holds_the_cloud\
\\re placename East Alligator River\
\\de place name in the Kundjikurdubuk estate on the middle reaches of the East Alligator River (location S 12\'ba 34.5, E 133\'ba 06.7)\
\\xv Namarnde Kangolkarrme kunukka fi:try benberldjarrhmeng benberldjadmi yimarnek ngolkarrmeninj\
ba-berldjahdjarrhmeng kayakki kun-ngol djarre rohrokmeng ka-warre darnki wanjh kun-ngol wanjh djarre,\
wernhkaddum. Wanjh ka-ngeyyo Namarnde Kangolkarrme.\
\\xe At Namarnde Kangolkarrme the ghost tried to extend his arms out to grab the clouds. He stretched up but it was too far and he could\
not reach the clouds as he was too close [to the ground] and the clouds too far away up high in the sky. And so that place is called\
today 'ghost holds the clouds'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 22/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx Namarnde Kunkorlokkorlok\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Area by a western tributary of the upper East Alligator River. Namarnde Kunkorlokkorlok is a few kilometres southwest of the confluence with the East Alligator at Kundjalerri Kayo, which is in turn around 47km southeast (upstream) of Cahill's Crossing. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx namarnkorl\
\\ps n.\
\\de Silver Barramundi. Kunwinjku dialect speakers tend to use this name as a generic for barramundi. Some Kuninjku dialect speakers use it as a term for larger juveniles.\
\\sc Lates calcarifer\
\\pdn kk = widjkurnkurd\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Namarrawuyu\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Hill and valley area by an eastern tributary of the upper East Alligator River. This valley is a traditional east-west walking route via which mankole ('bamboo spears') were traded. Namarrawuyu is about 8 kilometres east of the confluence with the East Alligator at Kundjalerri Kayo, which is in turn around 47km southeast (upstream) of Cahill's Crossing.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx namarrkmokadardja\
\\ps interj.\
\\de special greeting and leave taking in fv:Kundedjwarre clan lect used when greeting deceased ancestors at\
a particular site, especially sacred places. This word is used in conjunction with another word\
fv:namayhkurdihwarr.\
\\xv Kandi-bekkan bu dabborrabbolk Namarrkmokadardjarr Namayhkurdihwarr\
Kundedjwarrenin ngurri-kurrmerrimen kun-red and ngudberre kun-red kondanj ngadberre\
kun-red and ngayi 'boss' nga-yime ngayi kakkak nga-yime kun-red kondanj.\
\\xe Ancestors! listen to me, I greet you with the words 'Namarrkmokadardjarr Namayhkurdihwarr' you\
who were of the clan lect Kundedjwarre. Just stay where you are here in your place, our place, it's our\
country and now I'm the 'boss' of this my Mother's Mother's country here.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx namarrkon\
\\ps n.\
\\de lightning, lightning dreaming ancestor. On bark paintings he is drawn with hammers protruding from\
his body which he uses to throw and create thunder. Rock paintings of female lightning spirits have\
also been observed.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx namayhkurdihwarr\
\\ps interj.\
\\de special greeting and leave taking used when greeting deceased ancestors at a particular site, especially\
sacred places. This word is used in conjunction with another word fv:namarrkmok\'b7dardja.\
\\xv Kandi-bekkan bu dabborrabbolk Namarrkmokadardjarr Namayhkurdihwarr\
Kundedjwarrenin ngurri-kurrmerrimen kun-red and ngudberre kun-red kondanj ngadberre\
kun-red and ngayi 'boss' nga-yime ngayi kakkak nga-yime kun-red kondanj.\
\\xe Ancestors! listen to me, I greet you with the words 'Namarrkmokadardjarr Namayhkurdihwarr' you\
who were of the clan lect Kundedjwarre. Just stay where you are here in your place, our place, it's our\
country and now I'm the 'boss' of this my Mother's Mother's country here.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx name\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de put, place into position, make\
\\xv Birdi nameng Bulanj yi-na birri-marnbom, bininj, bininj mak birri-denge-nameng,\
birri-marnbom berlno yi-na, kunekke birri-yimiwong, kure, kure birri-yimiwo, nani, kodjno\
birri-nameng, bidno, bidno, dengeno, dengeno...birri-nameng mak. Birri-marnbom\
yi-bengkan, bininj.\
\\xe Bulanj, they used to make human figures with beeswax, they'd put the legs and arms, that's how they\
did it,like this (demonstrates), here, here, they'd put the head, and hands, fingers,and they'd put the feet\
also. They would make human figures.\
\\cf namerren\
\\ce transfigure self\
\\xv Wanjh mayh birri-namerrinj rowk. Birriwam rowk wanjh weleng mayh.\
\\xe Then they all changed themselves into animals. They all went away as animals.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx namekke\
\\ps dem\
\\de that one\
\
\\lx Namimwarre\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place north of Kubumi. Many rocky outcrops.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx naminjdjibuk\
\\ps n.\
\\de very young Silver Barramundi\
\\sc Lates calcarifer\
\\cf see fv:birlmu\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Namokardabu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Homeland Centre in Mirwi/Kamurkban country. (Kunbarlang)\
\
\\lx Namokarlbayi\
\\ps place n.\
\\de Namokarlbayi is a site near the eastern face of Djidbidjidbi (Mount Brockman) and means 'the bone with yellow ochre on it'. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Namolkabodme\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate near Ngandarrayo on escarpment outlier country with a little intermittent\
stream and small white clay mine.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Namolnjinji\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge pers.n.\
\\re Nakorrkko son's name\
\\de name of one of the two Nakorrkko creation ancestral heroes (the son)\
\\xv Namuranjinji kornkumo, Namolnjinji beywrud.\
\\xe Namuranjinji is the father and Namolnjinji is the son.\
\\sd mythology\
\\so LBN\
\\dt 17/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx namomoyak mamurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\de song style of the Kune used in public exchange or diplomacy ceremonies.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Namondowaran\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Area on an eastern tributary of the upper East Alligator River.  A major tributary meets the East Alligator from the southeast around the latitude of Cooinda.  Namondowaran is likely the area at a waterfall on this tributary a few kilometres upstream of the confluence. \
\\xv Bodjimdjimyi kare kaddum kure Djurleburrk, kaddum Namondowaran, koyek that creek... Kunred karrkad tharran.  \
\\xe From Bodjimdjimyi it goes upstream to Djurleburrk, and upstream on a tributary to the east is Namondowaran... which is up on top of the plateau.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Namorromo\
\\ps n. place\
\\sd placename\
\\de place just south of Kakodbebuldi, towards Mukkamukka in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate. \
\\ee People from Kakodbebuldi visit this shady braided stream of the Mann River as a\
day time camp for fishing and to escape the heat of fv:Kurrung season.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx namorrorddo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mythical creatures of a malevolent nature, na-morrorddo are shooting star spirits. They have long\
claws and trails of white light coming from their heads. They also carry a long club called fv:miyarrurl\
which they use to beat victims.\
\\xv Yiman kabene-rohrok nakidjkidj ya nakka wanjh kabene-rohrok namorrorddo.\
Namorrorddo kabirlikan, bid-ngalnj-kuyeng yoh.\
\\xe Namorrorddo is similar to the spirit called 'Nakidjkidj',the same as Nakidjkidj. Namorrorddo however\
carries light (ie. the shooting star) and has really long claws, yes.\
\\ee Yirridjdja, associated with Yabburdurrwa ceremony.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx namorrorddo\
\\ps n.\
\\ge spirit.being\
\\de 'bad angel', malevolent shooting star spirit having long claws and a killing club and who walks around\
at night looking for victims.\
\\ee yirridjdja moiety\
\\ee Affiliated with the Yabburdurrwa yirridjdja patrimoiety ceremony. There is a sacred site relating to this\
totem near Ngankorlord/Mankorlord, central Arnhem Land.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx namung\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Demansia_atra\
\\de Black whip snake\
\\xv Mayh, namung, wurrkurduk, nawu namung. Ngeybokenh. Bu ngaye ngayime wurrkurduk bedda kabarriyime namung. Nabang kanbaye, fi:nomo_really ngarrdowen.\
\\xe That snake, the black whip snake. It has two names. I call it wurrkurduk [in Kundedjnjenghmi] and others call it fv:namung. It is aggressive and can bite us, but we don't die, it's only mildly venomous.\
\\sc Demansia atra\
\\ee Black snake with red tail\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= berdkurlba, Kdj= djenbedjek, namu\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Namungun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate\
\\ee duwa\
\\ee Karrbarda kah-dedj-di.\
\\xe There are yams there.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Namuranjinji\
\\pref\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge pers.n.\
\\re Nakorrkko father's name\
\\de name of one of the two Nakorrkko creation ancestral heroes (the father)\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Namuranjinji kornkumo, Namolnjinji beywrud.\
\\xe Namuranjinji is the father and Namolnjinji is the son.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd mythology\
\\so LBN\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv\
\\ur\
\\dt 17/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx nan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de look\
\\ng PstPerf.=nang, PstImpf.=nani, Irrealis=nayinj\
\\xv Yi-na!\
\\xe Look!\
\\xv Nga-nan.\
\\xe I'll have a look.\
\\xv Nang.\
\\xe He saw it./I saw you.\
\\xv Nan.\
\\xe I'm looking at you.\
\\xv Minj nga-nayinj.\
\\xe I didn't see her.\
\\xv Nangahnang.\
\\xe I saw you (I was watching you).\
\\pdn kk = kurrurdme\
\
\\lx Nandel\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\\ee Kukimuk-ken.\
\\xe A large area.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nanih\
\\ps dem.\
\\de this one, that one, he, him\
\\uv W= nahni\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nanih\
\\va nani\
\\ps pron.\
\\de he, him, it\
\\uv W= nahni\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx naninjnawu\
\\ps rel.pron.\
\\de this which\
\
\\lx nangamenani\
\\va nangamed nani\
\\ps interj.\
\\de whatsisname\
\\xv Nani nangamenani wardbukkarrawardbukkarra yo nanih\
\\xe This is whatsisname, wardbukkarrawardbukkarra (a malevolent mimih spirit), yes, that's him.\
\
\\lx nangarddemo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of waterlily\
\\sc Nymphaea sp.\
\
\\lx nangarlminj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de miniature ground orchid with delicate white and mauve coloured flowers which appear in late dry to early wet seasons\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= nangarda\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nangarn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de unidentified plant, 'big leaf, in rock country'.\
\
\\lx Nangurlminj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place very close to Yikarrakkal outstation where the head of the rainbow serpent in the rock stands at\
the top of an outcrop.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nanjid\
\\ps adj.\
\\de small (amount)\
\\uv kun-dedjwarre clan lect\
\\sy na-dedjwarre\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nanjid\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de baby Agile Wallaby\
\\sc Macropus agilis.\
\
\\lx Nanjiwk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de This site is the name of the rock representing marladj \'91the orphan\'92 of the Kabbari orphan boy story. He and his older brother Nadjardenj were consumed by ngalyod at Kunyikuymi in the Kabbari complex on the Goomadeer River. The name Nanjiwk applies to the orphan and is not technically a place name. The rock is referred to by this name. It is a small stone less than a square metre which protrudes from under the sand at the bottom of the river valley cliff face at Kunyikuymi. It was formerly always covered in paperbark to mark its spiritual status.\
The traditional story has the boy crying because he wanted sex after spying a woman\'92s vagina. Today this story has been bowdlerised and Mamardawerre Bininj say that he cried for manbarrangkali lily corms which grow nearby at Kunngulukki. In private however (not in mixed sex company) the real story is told. Both versions are current.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Nardeyen\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de The head of the Bomarranj escarpment, the point which comes closest to the River on the western side of the Goomadeer River at Kabbari.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx narddo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sy kun-kurra\
\\sn 1\
\\de tree species, used as a herb for kangaroo meat\
\\sc Hakea arborescens\
\\uv I,E\
\\sn 2\
\\de kind of tree (10-20m) in vine forests\
\\sc Myristica insipida\
\\uv Djnj\
\\nt Identified from a photograph only and the identification is therefore suspect. fi:Cupaniopsis_anacardioides was also given the same name fv:narddo. In Kundjeyhmi however fi:Cupaniopsis_anacardioides is called fv:an-djerrawo.\
\\sn 3\
\\de freshwater mussel\
\\xv Narddo kaddum nakka kayongoyo. Nani ngarduk narddo karriyime, arringolung\
arringolungi, arrilahlarrhkeyi, djenkimuk.\
\\xe Those freshwater mussels are lying all over the surface. We say 'These are my mussels' and we roast\
them on the fire. They have very large 'tongues' [i.e. flesh]\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx narangem\
\\ps n.\
\\de male, boy\
\\pdn kk = na-birdiddji\
\
\\lx Nararra Kadjabdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Mandedjkadjang Creek region\
\\de Site on upper Mandedjkadjung Creek (Muralidbar Creek) in the Kunukdi estate. Here the watercourse takes a 90 degree bend before entering the escarpment area which takes it eventually past Mandedjkadjang outstation. There is still open savanna bordering the creek at Nararra Kadjabdi. Slightly downstream is a tributary flowing in from the south. The main creek continues at Nararra Kadjabdi to flow east. There is a boulder on the bend.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx narimadba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de salt-water oyster\
\\ee Wik Mungkan fv:remat 'oyster'.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx narin\
\\va nayin\
\\ps n.\
\\ge snake\
\\re snake (generic)\
\\de Snake (generic), although some suggest the name is species specific for non-venemous pythons. Venomous snakes can be referred to as fv:mayhbang.\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= nayin, E = kurridjardu\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Narinkawurlbbun\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate near fv:Kurrurldul.\
\
\\lx narren\
\\lc kabene-narren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\de a man and woman 'interested' in each other, in a non-marital/extra-marital relationship, be\
boyfriend-girlfriend.\
\\lit 'looking at each other'\
\\xv Kabene-narren.\
\\xe Those two are 'seeing each other' (boyfriend/girlfriend).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx narrenku\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de lilyseed food\
\\pde 1. djedbarl, 2. kanjwerr.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx narrobad\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de juvenile male Macropus robustus\
\\dv Karlkberd yaw\
\
\\lx narrulmi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mythological kangaroo relating to wubarr ceremony\
\
\\lx Nawakka\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Waridjngu clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Nawalabik\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de name of mythological character of Kamarrang subsection, in-law of fv:Ngurdyawok from well known\
Mayali myth.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nawarlah\
\\ps n.\
\\de Brown river stingray.\
\\sd fish\
\\sc Dasyatis sp.\
\\sy burrnguk\
\\dt 12/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx Nawarlah\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place name in Djok clan estate.\
\
\\lx Nawarlkadjan\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in the Tin Camp Creek region\uc0\u8232 \\de Scattered rocky outcrops on a plateau just above the upper (eastern) reaches of the Tin Camp Creek valley. Nawarlkadjan is on the northern side of the end of the valley.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx nawaran\
\\agr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Oenpelli python\
\\sc Morelia oenpelliensis\
\\ee Grows to a very large size and lives in rock country. fv:Kun-merlem kuk-bele, kubodmebulerri\} 'It's belly is white and its back is dark in colour'.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Nawaran Karredj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region\
\\de Area near the eastern escarpment face of Djidbidjidbi (the Mount Brockman outlier). A small creek running through the plain here flows north into Magela Creek. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Nawekke\
\\ps n.\
\\re place name\
\\de Place on the Mann River where ancestral fv:ngalalek people turned into corella birds.\
\
\\lx nawordjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\de flood water\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx Naworo\uc0\u8232 \\va Naworo Bim\u8232 \\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Cave southwest of Kudjekbinj outstation with an alternative name of Aledbarrabarndi. The main feature of the site is a large coffin shaped slab which has dropped from the ceiling on to the ground. The ceiling features an enormous painting of Naworo, which is considered his waralno \'91spirit\'92 placed there by himself. This image may be the largest single rock art painting in Australia. There are human skeletal remains there also which may belong to the Ngalngbali apical ancestor Maralngurra, which is now the most common Ngalngbali clan surname. The site is considered dangerous and must be treated with great respect. Children are not allowed to visit. The alternative name Aledbarrabarndi is not commonly used today. \
\\xv Darnki Naworo. Naworo koyek, Bakbarre karrikad. Kunrurrk mankimuk bim dorrengh.\uc0\u8232 \\xe Bakbarre is near Naworo which is to the east and Bakbarre is west. It is a large shelter with paintings.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx naworrkorl\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de green ant\
\\uv Kun-walidjaw clan lect for ordinary language fv:bodbang.\
\\sn 2\
\\de In Kune dialect refers to the green ant nest eggs which are used taken as a medicine by crushing them and mixing the mash with water and then drinking the strained mixture.\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Naworrkorl\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kubumi estate, downstream from the Kubumi waterhole.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Naworrmokorrmo\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Namorrorddo site at the top of Kurrudjmuk hill. Note that this site sounds very similar to another site called fv:Nakorrmohkorrmo which is a dog site associated with the fv:Kabbari complex on the western sid eof the \'91Goomadeer\'92 River.\
\\cf Kurrudjmuk\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx nawu\
\\ps rel. pron.\
\\de who, that, which\
\\xv Nawu njale?\
\\xe What's that?, About what?\
\\xv Nawu korroko birri-ngeybom dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe It was the ancestors who called them in this way.\
\\xv Yi-bengkan kun-red nawu karri-wam karri-nang kinga?\
\\xe Do you know that place where we saw the crocodile?\
\
\\lx nawulhmu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Fresh-water crocodile\
\\sc Crocodylus johnstoni\
\\pdn kk = ngaldjakdjalarrk\
\\uv E\
\\sy modjarrkki\
\\uv W, Djnj, Kdj = modjarrkki, I = kumoken, Djnj (syn.)= mokkorri.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nawunawu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de whale species\
\
\\lx nawurlam\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de whirlwind\
\\sy bidj\uc0\u729 rru\
\\uv W= nadjardawo.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nayarru\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de dancing belt made from feathers and string usually of the bark from Brachychiton paradoxum\
(Kurrajong).\
\\uv Djnj.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Nayinin\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename near Kabarlahyo and Mokmek on route from former to Mibarlwarra on Liverpool River. The next site on this route is Nakorlk Kayo.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx nayuhyungki\
\\ps n.\
\\re first people, ancestors\
\\re ancestors\
\\de Ancestors, the first people, the creator beings.\
\\xv Kun-red nga-bolknahnan djang ngarduk nawu kurrmerrinj ba-kurrmerrinj nayuhyungki dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe I am looking after this place, my dreaming which was placed here by the first [creator] ancestors.\
\\dt 20/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx nayuma\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de 'blue fish' (saltwater)\
\
\\lx nelk\
\\ps formative\
\\ge fontanelle\
\\de formative in fv:kodjnelk\
\\cf see fv:kodjnelk\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nenerrke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de rattle boomerangs together\
\
\\lx nerrnghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de cracking of a falling tree just as it starts to fall\
\\uv Djnj= -kuyinhme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx neyh\
\\lc kun-neyh\
\\va kun-neyh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de elbow\
\
\\lx neyhneykendi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lie down on your elbows, head up\
\
\\lx ni\
\\ps stative verbaliser (suffix), past tense.\
\\xv Manme-yak-ni.\
\\xe He/she didn't have any food.\
\\xv Bu nga-yahwurd-ni.\
\\xe When I was small (a child).\
\\xv Tuesday-ni birrim-wam.\
\\xe They came on Tuesday.\
\
\\lx ni\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sit, be, stay\
\\ce ningihni (iterative reduplication)\
\\cf just kept sitting\
\\pdn kk = -morndi\
\
\\lx Nibbulngu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan on the southern Arnhem Land plateau associated with the Dalabon language\
\\xv Nibbulngu, Burrmurla kun-red walem djarre kanjdji Drennokah Darlangarrka, kakbi. Kela\
Nibbulngu, Nabima bayakminj kun-kare wo:dam. Nungka barridjarrkrey Nakorrkko.\
Dangbon ba-wokdiwokdi.\
\\xe In the Nibbulngu clan estate is the site Burrmurla, a long way to the south [of Kabulwarnamyo]. Downstream from there are the sites\
Drennokah and Darlangarra, to the north. There was this Nibbulngu clansman of Kela subsection who died a long time ago during the\
[second world] war time. He travelled together with the Nakorrkko [father and son ancestral cult heroes]. He spoke the Dangbon\
language.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx nidberren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stop in one's tracks\
\\xv Ka-rrolkkan ka-re ka-nidberren ka-koronhme.\
\\xe He gets up, off he goes, stops and looks back. (Words of fv:wurrurrumi song ).\
\
\\lx Nimirrili\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de main crossing of Blythe river on Maningrida to Ramingining road. fv:Balngarra clan estate.\
\\uv Rem.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nin\
\\ps n.\
\\re double-barred finch\
\\re fi:Taeniopygia bichenovii\
\\de double barred finch\
\\sc Taeniopygia bichenovii\
\\cf djurrkul\
\\uv I, E\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ninhninh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge isopod.sp.\
\\re Isopod sp.\
\\de kind of freshwater isopod, so-named because of the sound that it makes\
\\xv Ninhninh, ku-wukku ka-wake. Nungan yimerranj ka-djaldi, nungan ba-yimerranj. Yiman ka-rohrok namekke mayh-ngong nawu nakka karri-ngun ngalngken.\
\\xe fv:ninhninh isopods crawl around in the freshwater. They have always been here, from the beginning. They are similar to other crustaceans, like those yabbies that we eat.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 04/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx niniwirrih\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of plant\
\\xv Niniwirrih ngurrurdu kangun, ankung karrahkendong.\
\\xe Emus eat the fv:Daviesia reticulata shrub and bees fill their hives with honey from it.\
\\sc Daviesia reticulata\
\
\\lx -no\
\\sd relational affix\
\\ps possd noun suff.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge possd.n\
\\re possessed noun suffix (third person)\
\\de Suffix marking nouns possessed by a third person (overt or implicit). In Western dialects, it is optional but rare in Kunwinjku. It can be used anaphorically where the possessor has been either previously mentioned or inferred by the context. \
\\xv Yibelengkme an-bundjek an-djudj marlaworrno-be.\
\\xe You can lick manna off the leaves of the smooth-stemmed bloodwood.\
\\xv Wurdurdno, rakul, korlobbok, koddowkkoddowk, kikkik, njanjuk-njanjuk mayh nawernken, barridowerrinj.\
\\xe Her children; red-eyed pigeon, diamond dove, bar-shouldered dove, brown honeyeater, all the many birds, they were hungry.\
\\sn 2\
\\de In Eastern dialects (Kuninjku, Kune, Mayali) the anaphoric function may no longer apply and the use is extended to a general marker of parthood (especially of body parts and landscape features). In these cases it will frequently replace a noun class prefix e.g. fv:labbarlno instead of fv:man-labbarl or fv:kodjno instead of fv:kun-kodj.\
\\xv Nangahnang dedjbom rowk malkno, nguneng, rdurdduno, derbadno, derbadno, nguneng bonj la wanjh kurrmeng la wam.\
\\xe He watched, cut all the guts up, he ate the liver, the heart, the kidneys, he ate the kidneys and then he put it there and off he went.\
\\xv Kure Durlmangkarrken dulumno ya karrkad kure yirridjdja na-Rolken \
\\xe In the Durlmangkarr clan's country there is a hill and further upstream it is fi:yirridjdja moiety country of the Rol clan.\
\
\\lx nome\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de smell, sniff\
\\xv Ngadjawinjnome.\
\\xe I can smell something cooking.\
\
\\lx none\
\\va norne\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wasp.sp.\
\\re wasp species\
\\de Wasp that preys on native honey bees. Culturally significant to members of the fv:Mok clan. The wasp is said to lead humans to honey hives which after being broken open can also be accessed by the wasp. The totemic focus for this species is a fi:Syzygium_suborbiculare tree at Kabulwarnamyo outstation in the Liverpool River region. An increase ritual involves striking the trunk of the tree with an axe which is said to increase both the wasps and the honey hives they will lead humans to.\
\\sc Bembix sp.\
\\sd insects\
\
\\lx norlbnorlbme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de boil (of water)\
\\sy Ka-bo-rrolkan.\
\
\\lx norrhmeng\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de snore\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= borrme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nud\
\\lc kunnud\
\\va nudno\
\\ps n.\
\\de pus or rotting food\
\\pdn kk = kun-nadjarr\
\\cf nudminj\
\\ce rotten (gone off)\
\
\\lx nudbanj\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Stink (of rotting substances).\
\\xv Kanudbanj, yiwemen djarre.\
\\xe It stinks, throw it far away.\
\\pdn kk = ka-nadjarrbanj.\
\
\\lx nudnud\
\\ps n.\
\\re coal grunter\
\\re fi:Hephaestus_carbo\
\\de Coal grunter.\
\\sc Hephaestus carbo\
\\uv I\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 12/May/2014\
\
\\lx nudmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de rot, decay\
\\pdn kk = nadjarrmen\
\
\\lx nuhnud\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Spangled Grunter\
\\sc Leiopotherapon unicolor\
\
\\lx nuk\
\\ps interj.\
\\de maybe, who knows (the speaker is not sure or doesn't know).\
\
\\lx Nukorrobb\'9crl\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate (not sure, check)\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx nuna\
\\ps n.\
\\de European('balanda') woman\
\\bw from Makassarese n\'dbna 'Miss, Mrs'\
\
\\lx nungan\
\\ps pron.\
\\de himself\
\
\\lx nunghke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de nibbling of fish on fishing line\
\
\\lx nungka\
\\va nungkah\
\\ps pron.\
\\sn 1\
\\de he, him\
\
\\lx nungkakih\
\\ps pron.\
\\ge that's.him\
\\re him\
\\re that's him, that's the one\
\\de him now, that's him, that's the one now\
\\ng emphatic\
\
\\lx nunj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va nunjno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge saliva\
\\re saliva\
\\de saliva, spittle\
\\sn 2\
\\ge bubbles\
\\re bubbles\
\\de bubbles of spittle, water, soap or detergent\
\\cf nunjbun\
\\ce to spit\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx nunjek\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Ampelocissus.acetosa\
\\re fi:Ampelocissus_acetosa\
\\de wild grape (a low growing and scrambling climber with edible black currant-like fruit)\
\\sc Ampelocissus acetosa\
\\sy an-wak\
\\ee fv:an-wak is the name for a number of plants with similar clustered fruits- |fi\{Leea rubra, Melostoma sp. and |fi\{Ampelocissus\
acetosa.\}\
\\uv Kdj\
\\uv Djnj= an-djalke\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx nunjwirlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de produce saliva, dribble saliva.\
\
\\lx nunjyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr nunj 'saliva' yo 'lie'\
\\ge saliva.lie\
\\re mother's country relationship\
\\de be in mother's country relationship to a place or clan reference\
\\xv Ya, la nungan Kun-Warradjngu, ngan-yawmey ngadberre ngarri-nunjyo wanjh.\
\\xe His mother's clan is Warradjngu and he [in turn] is our mother's brother and so we call his clan our mother's country.\
\\ee The verb -nunjyo which literally means 'saliva lies' is another kinship verb meaning the subject has a matrilineal relationship with a\
referent. Eg. fv:nga-nunjyo 'I am in a matrilineal relationship with the antecedant tract of land reference'. The term is usually used in the\
context of someone's relationship to a place or an area of land. The etymology of this term is most likely something connected to the\
saliva of a baby which dribbles onto the breast of its mother or perhaps the kissing relationship between mother and child. The verb is\
intransitive and thus takes subject pronominal prefixes only. \
\\sd kinship\
\\so Mick Kubarkku\
\\sy -berrekuykme\
\\uv W, I, Djnj, Kdj, E\
\\dt 15/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Nurlorlhlorlh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx nuye\
\\ps poss.pron.\
\\de his\
\
\\lx N\'fang\'fanday\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx nga-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de First person exclusive (1 minimal) intransitive pronominal prefix\
\\xv Nga-re Mumeka.\
\\xe I'm going to Mumeka.\
\\sn 2\
\\de First person singular subject, third person singular object (1minimal/3minimal) pronominal prefix.\
\\xv Nga-won man-me.\
\\xe I'm giving her food.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Non-verbal pronominal characteristic prefix.\
\\xv nga-marre-kuyeng.\
\\xe I have long hair.\
\
\\lx Ngabardengulduma\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Sandy section of the upper Goomadeer River and adjacent country, around 3km southwest of the confluence of the Goomadeer and Gumardir rivers. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 18/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Ngabakyerrbinj\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A spring or soak in the Maburrinj estate. The site is about 3km south-southwest from Mimolorrk in an open forested plain with a pandanus grove. The water is naturally clear and clean but in recent times the water, ground and vegetation have suffered extensive damage from pigs and buffalo. Lofty Bardayal Nadjamerrek once suggested this as a possible outstation or occasional camp site to Ross Nabobbob, na-Bangardi na-Warddjak. The creek flows west from here to the next site Kunbakminyawol.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ngabarrak\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bloodwood.sp.\
\\re variable-barked bloodwood, also known as small-fruited bloodwood\
\\re small-fruited bloodwood also known as variable-barked bloodwood\
\\de variable-barked bloodwood, also known as the small-fruited bloodwood\
\\xv An-yawko yawno an-ngabarrak ngal-badjan.\
\\xe The fi:Eucalyptus_tectifica tree is the smaller or child tree and fi:Corymbia_dichromophloia is the mother tree.\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_dichromophloia\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj (an-), I (man-)\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Nov/2007\
\
\\lx ngabbard\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my brother-in-law, your father, you are my uncle\
\\cn na-buleng ngarrku.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngabbard\
\\ps n.\
\\re father\
\\de Father, father\'92s brother and equivalents (e.g. skewed relationships such as when a cross-cousin is skewed up a generation and called \'91father\'92).\
\\xv \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Konda ngabbard ngane-yoy, ankabo ani kamworrkolung manmulmu ngarriyoy. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl240
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\xe My father and I camped here, on that creek where the ground rises and falls, we camped in the paperbarks. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \\sd kinship\
\
\
\\lx ngabbardme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de call someone by the kin term 'father'\
\\xv Ngane-djarrkngabbardme.\
\\xe We both call him 'father'.\
\
\\lx ngabek\
\\lc kun-ngabek\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de hair\
\\sy kun-marre\
\
\\lx ngabudj\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Onychogalea_unguifera\
\\de Northern nailtail wallaby. This animal is rarely seen and almost never caught. It is very small and extremely fast and flighty. C.P. Mountford (in Records of the American Australian Scientific Expedition to Arnhem Land, 1-Art, Myth and Symbolism, p. 240 and plate 70C), refers to this animal as a kangaroo rat and recorded the name 'nabut'. He also includes a photograph of a bark painting of the animal, describing fv:ngabudj as "a small kangaroo-like marsupial called 'nabut', a creature about two feet in height. The aborigines assert that this little creature is so fast in its movements that they are seldom able to catch it."\
\\sc Onychogalea unguifera\
\\ee Sometimes seen near Mumeka on the Mann River around stands of fv:djendek palms. fv:ngudj-bang\
\\cf Burarra name for small-eared rock wallaby is cognate\
\\sd mammal\
\
\\lx ngabudjngamimidjidbilk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of grass similar to the sandstone country spinifexes such as fv:anyokkolomud.\
\\sc (unidentified)\
\
\\lx ngad\
\\ps pron.\
\\de we (3+ excl.)\
\
\\lx ngad\
\\lc kun-ngad\
\\ps n. (incorporable)\
\\sd geographic\
\\de water well\
\
\\lx ngadberre\
\\ps ob.pron.\
\\de us (3 excl.)\
\
\\lx ngadburrung\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de sibling (referent only)\
\
\\lx ngadko\
\\ps pron.\
\\de you (singular) and me\
\\sy ngudda ngayi\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx ngadman\
\\ps refl.pron.\
\\de ourselves (both incl. and excl.)\
\
\\lx ngadjadj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de uncle, MB, MBSS\
\
\\lx ngadjadj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my uncle, your son. Another example is when speaker and hearer call each\
other fv:makka, speaker calls referent uncle, hearer calls referent son-in-law or fv:na-kurrng.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngadjdjelek\
\\ps n.\
\\re catfish sp.\
\\re Salmon catfish\
\\re fi:Neoarius_graeffei\
\\re fi:Neoarius_leptaspis\
\\de Two species of salmon (or \'91fork-tailed\'92) catfish, the more common being fi:Neoarius_graeffei. Some Kuninjku speakers say the fv:yirridjdja moiety name is fv:ngadjdjelek and the fv:duwa moiety name is fv:kurrkurrbi.\
\\sc Neoarius graeffei, Neoarius leptaspis\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= manmakkawarri, ngalmakkawarri\
\\pdn ngalwalamarrernku\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngadjeng\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re strike, hit\
\\de Strike, hit.\
\\xv Ka-mayhke, ka-rrulkngadjeng.\
\\xe It flickers, and strikes trees.\
\\xv Namarrgon ngan-ngadjeng.\
\\xe Lightning might strike me.\
\\xv Nga-rrulkngadjeng.\
\\xe I'm going to hit the wood.\
\\uv W, Kdj?\
\\dt 16/May/2014\
\
\\lx ngadjibbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re sneeze\
\\de Sneeze\
\\uv W, I, Kdj\
\\xv Nga-ngadjibbun.\
\\xe I sneeze.\
\\dt 16/May/2014\
\
\\lx ngadjkewarre\
\\lc na-ngadjkewarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent uncle (mother's\
brother), hearer calls referent, cousin or fv:na-kurrng\
\\cn na-karrngburrk.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngadjkewarre\
\\lc ngal-ngadjkewarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, 1.speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent mother, hearer\
calls referent mother-in-law or fv:ngal-kurrng.\
\\cn ngal-kurrngburrk\
\\sn 2\
\\de My mother, your aunty, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nga-djongokngarre\
\\cf see fv:-djongokngarre.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngahbarna\
\\ps interj.\
\\re clan lect for Bolmo (Marlkawo)\
\\de Clan lect interjection or fv:kundangwok used by the Bolmo clan (Marlkawo lineage).\
\\xv Med nga-yawan. Bonjdjel, bonjdjel kun-wok. Bonjdjel Buyhmi yo, bonjdjel. Ngahbarna, wanjh Bolmo. Bedman kedderrekedderre nawu nani wurdurd bedman kedderrekedderre manu Dordokkiyu kunwok, bedman bonjdjel Buyhmi.\
\\xe Hang on, um, the word is fv:bonjdjel, fv:bonjdjel, that\'92s the Buyhmi clan\'92s fv:kundangwok word. The Bolmo people [at Marlkawo] say fv:ngahbarna. And the Bolmo at Dordokkiyu, these young fellas here, they say fv:kedderrekedderre but the Buyhmi say fv:bonjdjel.\
\\sd kundangwok\
\\dt 27/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx ngakme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge drown\
\\re drown\
\\de drown\
\\sn 2\
\\ge be.inundated\
\\re inundated, be washed away by force of water\
\\de be washed away by the force of water, be inundated\
\\uv E= ngarkme\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Ngakmiyi\
\\ph the 'k' preceeding the nasal 'm' is an unusual phoneme. In Kune and Dangbon, it can be pronounced as a nasalized voiceless velar fricative.\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\uv E, D\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngakngak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Pied Butcherbird\
\\sc Cracticus nigrogularis\
\\xv Kure djendek ka-barndi ka-mulewan bu karrim-re 'ngakngak' ka-yime.\
\\xe It sits up in the Livistonia palms and tells if humans are coming by calling 'ngakngak'.\
\
\\lx ngakoynguneng\
\\ps interj.\
\\de yum yum 'how delicious'\
\\pdn often used by children\
\
\\lx Ngakoleng\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Western side of a small valley just west of the Djurlka waterfall. Site for Namorrorddo.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ngalabarddaman\
\\va kalabarddaman\
\\ps n.\
\\de type of honey found in rock which is also used for rock art\
\\xv Ngalabarddaman na-wardde-ken. Birdi ka-karrme koyno. Birdi ku-rrulk na-buyika.\
\\xe fv:Ngalabarddaman is found in rock. The wax has a resin. Beeswax from trees is different.\
\\sd bees&honey\
\
\\lx Ngalakarrwara\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Ngalalaman\
\\cf See fv:Alalaman\
\
\\lx ngalelek\
\\ps n.\
\\re little corella\
\\re corella\
\\re fi:Cacatua_sanguinea\
\\de Little Corella\
\\sc Cacatua sanguinea\
\\xv Ngalelek birri-berdnudwi biri-wam la Na-korrkko nakka bene-rraykang.\
\\xe The Corela ancestors went uncircumcised but the Nakorrkko father and son were circumcised.\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngalandjakbelhbelbe\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd bird\
\\de Spoonbill\
\\pde muluymuluy\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngalanno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de shell of turtle\
\\cf bodme-ngalanno\
\\ce turtle shell\
\\sn 2\
\\de hard outer crust\
\\xv Ngalan-rayekminj.\
\\xe The crust has hardened (referring to the sugar inside a glass jar).\
\
\\lx ngalarbme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de swim\
\\pde wurlebme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngalarrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de shatter, smash into many pieces\
\\xv Ngalarrlarrhmeng.\
\\xe It shattered.\
\
\\lx Ngalawengkarri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place name with sacred site at Bulkay on Tomkinson River flood plain. The site consists of a grove of\
pandanus trees said to be the transfigured form of the spirits of ancestors.\
\\ee Malngno birri-rayekminj wanjh birri-marnburrinj kundayarr.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngalayngu\
\\lc na-ngalayngu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.our uncle (mother's brother), we are same sex siblings. 2.my father, your\
uncle, we are cousins ie.fv:na-/ngal-kurrng.\
\\cn same\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngalayngu\
\\lc ngal-ngalayngu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.our mother, we are same sex siblings. 2.my my mother, your father's sister,\
you are my fv:ngal-kurrng.\
\\cn same.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Ngalbadbulu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de a place in the Kunburray 'big name' region\
\\xv Ngalbadbulu Kunburray kure njilhmi ka-rri, ka-welewelme barrk.\
\\xe At Ngalbadbulu in the Kunburray area, there is a spring and there are lots of black\
wallaroos.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 03/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx ngalbangurru\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lizard.sp.\
\\re Chameleon dragon\
\\re fi:Chelosania_brunnea\
\\de Chameleon dragon\
\\sc Chelosania brunnea\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= walwalngurru, Djnj= alwalngurru, ngalwalngurru\
\\pdn kk = kerngborlh\
\\sd reptiles/amphib\
\
\\lx ngalbbolo\
\\cf see fv:-bbolo\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Ngalbole\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Ngalbongarla\
\\va Nabongarla\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate. Known at Manmoyi as a little creek crossing.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx ngalbu\
\\ps demonstrative\
\\de it, she, that\
\
\\lx ngalbulkayken\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de reference term used by a man about his sister. Literally 'the one out of the grave'.\
\
\\lx ngaldadmurrng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Saratoga, Northern Spotted Barramundi\
\\sc Scleropages jardini\
\\pdn kk = ngalkalngunkabarn\
\\uv Yirridjdja name is fv:ngal-dadmurrng and duwa is fv:kondorr. W= kuluybirr\
\\uv Kune= ngalkid\
\\ee REM= murldurlngu\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngal-daluk\
\\ps n.\
\\de female\
\\xv ngal-dahdaluk\
\\xe women\
\\pdn kk = ngal-djubdjubken\
\
\\lx Ngaldubbirra\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre-Kubumi estate not far from Namimwarre.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014 \
\
\\lx ngaldjangarabunebune\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de File Snake\
\\pdv kk\
\\sy ngaldjangarakerlkkerlk\
\\pde bekka.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngaldjangarakerlkkerlk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de File Snake\
\\pdv kk\
\\sy ngaldjangarabunebune\
\\pde bekka.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngaldjangarakurlngunj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de black headed python.\
\\sc Aspidites melanocephalus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djurn.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngaldjarlarrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de salt water cockle shells\
\
\\lx ngaldjekmino\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge wattle.seeds\
\\re wattle seeds\
\\re black wattle seeds\
\\de Seeds of the black wattle fiAcacia_auriculiformis.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx ngaldjenken\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de garfish\
\\ee Kanjdji kun-keb la kaddum kun-dang.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngaldjingbornko\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de honey type\
\\pde lorlbban\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngaldjingburduwalangan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de brolga\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde ngalkordow\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngaldjirnidjirnirrinjken\
\\ps n.\
\\de Circumspect name for fv:ngalyod 'the rainbow serpent' because rainbow serpents are said to be associated with some mistletoe (i.e. fv:an-djirnirrinj ) and only 'clevermen' are able to determine whether or not a rainbow serpent lives in a tree which has a mistletoe.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx ngal-djubdjubken\
\\ps n.\
\\de female\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde ngal-daluk.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngaldjum\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de sister (vocative) when the speaker is a male.\
\\sy yabok\
\
\\lx ngaldjum\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my sister, your fv:mamamh (daughter's daughter), you and I call each other\
fv:mamamh.\
\\cn ngal-mulebe.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx -ngale\
\\ps interrog.\
\\de who/which\
\\xe Ngudda yi-ngale yi-ngeyyo?\
\\xv What is your name?\
\\xv Man-ngale ngurrim-wam?\
\\xe Which truck did you come in?\
\\xv Kun-ngale bi-rrulubom?\
\\xe Which (part of his/her body) did it pierce?\
\\xv Na-ngale na-med.\
\\xe What's his name (I can't think of it).\
\\xv Manih man-ngale.\
\\xe What is this plant called?\
\
\\lx ngalekke\
\\ps pron.\
\\de she, that one (of females)\
\
\\lx ngalele\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\de white currant tree\
\\sc Flueggea virosa\
\\sy an-korrwan\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-korrwan\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx ngalemerrk\
\\pr an-, \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Cynanchum_pedunculatum\
\\de Prostrate or twining perennial, herb or climber with white-cream/red-purple flowers for most of the year. Grows in rocky areas. It has a small radish-like edible tuber available most of the year. The unripened fruit pods can also be eaten cooked or raw.\
\\xv Makkan ngalemerrk an-me, an-yong wanjki bad ngalemerrk, yo nani nawu. An-me arri-nguni dabborrabbolk, bad an-me ka-karrme. Makkan marrek marnengeybuyi mak boyen bu, ngalemerrk.\
\\xe The fv:ngalemerrk is edible, similar to fv:an-yong but called fv:ngalemerrk, yes this here. We used to eat that, the old people\'97 it's edible. I haven't mentioned it to you before, fv:ngalemerrk.\
\\sc Cynanchum pedunculatum\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur E= na-melengerrk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Aug/2007\
\
\\lx ngaleng\
\\ps pron.\
\\de she/her\
\
\\lx ngaleng ngarre\
\\ps poss.pron.\
\\de hers\
\
\\lx ngalengman\
\\ps refl.pron.\
\\de herself\
\
\\lx ngali\
\\va ngalih\
\\ps pron.\
\\de she, her\
\
\\lx ngalinj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Ipomoea.spp.\
\\re fi:Ipomoea_velutina\
\\re fi:Ipomoea_graminea\
\\de Annual thin twining vine from perennial rootstock. Leaves: smooth, narrow, linear to linear-lanceolate tapering to base, blade 60-160 mm long x 2-12 mm wide, petiole 4-10 mm long. Flowers: large, white, tubular shaped, 50-100 mm long, on stalks to 18 mm long; opening during the night and closed during the day. The tuber is dug up, roasted, peeled and eaten.\
\\sc Ipomoea graminea, Ipomoea velutina\
\\ee In Kuninjku this plant is named according to moiety. The fv:duwa moiety version is called fv:man-ngalinj and the fv:yirridjdja variety is fv:man-wohmi. In Kune there is a name for a variety called fv:man-djimburr which is bigger than fv:man-ngalinj.\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur Djnj, Kdj= an-wohmi\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 2\
\\de name of a Kune fv:kun-borrk song series from the fv:bongolinj-bongolinj sub-genre which is named after the fi:Ipomoea plant\
\\p see photo of body decorations from the djabbi cerremony at Yilan in early 1990s and also pic in iPhoto anwohmi:Ipomoea graminea2\
\\dt 18/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx Ngalirrikewern\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in fv:Djok clan area.\
\
\\lx ngalk\
\\lc kun-ngalk\
\\va ngarlkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de cliff face\
\\xv Kukkurr yi-bolk-bengkan kure kun-ngalk ka-rri.\
\\xe Do you know that place fv:Kukkurr where there's a cliff.\
\
\\lx ngalkadjba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de lizard species, similar to blue-tongued skink but as yet unidentified\
\\xv Ngalkadjba la kurri nabuyika nungan. Ka-rohrok bad na-rayek. Kurlah-rayek, kuk-rayek, kurlahno ka-rohrok.\
\\xe Ngalkadjba is different to the blue-tongued skink. It's the same but hard, its skin is hard and its body is\
hard, but the skin is similar.\
\\nt check\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngalkadjeddjed\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Echidna\
\\pde ngarrbek\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Ngalkalkkay\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de CHECK\
\
\\lx ngalkalngunjkabarn\
\\ps n.\
\\ge saratoga\
\\re saratoga (gun-gurrng register)\
\\de Saratoga, northern spotted barramundi\
\\sc Scleropages jardini\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde ngaldadmurrng\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 22/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx ngalkarrngmari\
\\ps n.\
\\de a kind of wild honey (sugar bag), found high up in trees, like syrup.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde diyawarra\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngalkayedyed\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\sn 1\
\\de prawn\
\\sn 2\
\\de yabby\
\\pde 1.yad\
\\pde 2. ngalng.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Ngalkbon\
\\ps n.\
\\de language name, dialect related to Dalabon language.\
\
\\lx ngalke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de find something\
\\xv Yabok, yabok manih nga-ngalkeng man-kung kure mikambe.\
\\xe Sister, sister I've found some honey here in an ant bed.\
\\xv Djudju ngan-marne-ngalkeng.\
\\xe I've got a toothache.\
\\cf -ridngalke\
\\ce start trouble\
\
\\lx ngalkebkarlerrh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Freshwater longtom\
\\uv Kundedjwarre clan lect\
\\uv I=karlerrh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngalkeblorrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Spangled Grunter, Jewel Perch\
\\uv Kundedjwarre clan lect\
\\uv I=boddowk, W= burd\
\\sc Leiopotherapon unicolor\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngalkid\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Saratoga, Northern Spotted Barramundi\
\\syn barrhmanj\
\\sc Scleropages jardini\
\\uv E\
\\uv W= kuluybirr,I =ngaldadmurrng\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngalkka\
\\va ngalkkan\
\\ps pron.\
\\de her/she\
\
\\lx ngalknan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de view from a high vantage point such as from the top of a cliff\
\\xv Bene-royhmeng bene-ngarlknang bene-nang djarre, kun-red djarre.\
\\xe They both took a peek and could see the country for a long way.\
\
\\lx ngalkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de Entrance tube to various species of native bee hives, made from cerumen (bee resin).\
\\sy kebno\
\\sd bees&honey\
\
\\lx Ngalkodjok Wokyirranj\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kunburray estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx ngalkodjorrhmi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de orange footed scrub fowl, black hen\
\\sc Megapodius reinwardt\
\\xv Ngaleng ka-warrkme kure man-ngarre.\
\\xe She (the scrub fowl) scratches around in the vine thickets.\
\
\\lx Ngalkomdurn\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx ngalkomkuyeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de snake-necked turtle\
\\sy komrdawh\
\
\\lx ngalkordow\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de brolga\
\\sc Grus rubicunda\
\\pdn kk = ngaldjingburduwalangan\
\
\\lx Ngalkordow Bolkdudmeng\uc0\u8232 \\va Ngalkordow Bolkdjudjmeng\u8232 \\va Ngalkordow Bolkdjurdmeng\u8232 \\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place to the west of Djelkmerre in the Birrirddak Creek region. Literally means \'91brolga poked the ground\'92.\
\\xv Karrikad, kanjdjihkanjdji kah-kolung wanjh Ngalkordow Bolkdjudjmeng djarrang road-ni korroko, djarrang road makka.\
\\xe West, downstream it goes down to Ngalkordow Bolkdjudjmeng, there\'92s an old horse track, a road there. \uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\u8232 \\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ngalkuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de unidentified, has green feathers\
\\xv Ngalkuk ka-buhme 'mmmm' yiman bulukki.\
\\xe fv:Ngalkuk has a droning call like a bull.\
\
\\lx ngalkunburriyaymi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de ancestral mermaid creature, the daughter of the rainbow serpent fv:yingarna. She can be fv:duwa or\
fv:yirridjdja. There is a sacred site for a duwa fv:ngalkunburriyaymi at fv:Ngaldubbirra near fv:Kubumi\
in fv:na-kulmarru clan lands. Here she lives in the water under the rock ledges on the side of the river\
except at night when she comes out and swims around. It is said that only the fv:duwa moiety ones\
come out of the water. (MK)\
\\sy fv:ngalkunburriyaymi is also described as fv:ngal-berd-djenj or having a tail like a fish.\
Also fv:yawkyawk.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngalkundamenkorrongko\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de mud crab\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde barnkabarra\
\\sc Scylla serrata\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Ngalkurrunj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate in fv:Mimarlarr area.\
\\nt check palatal.\
\
\\lx ngalkwarre\
\\va ka-ngalkwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\sn 1\
\\de valley with steep sides and difficult passage\
\\sn 2\
\\de large outlier of very large proportions eg. Djidbidjidbi in Mirarr clan country.\
\
\\lx ngalmakkawarri\
\\ps n.\
\\re catfish sp.\
\\re Salmon catfish\
\\re fi:Neoarius_graeffei\
\\re fi:Neoarius_leptaspis\
\\de Two species of salmon (or \'91fork-tailed\'92) catfish.\
\\sc Neoarius graeffei, Neoarius leptaspis\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\uv I = ngadjdjelek, Kdj= almakkawarri\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Ngalmalandjuhmeng\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Kubumi estate on the Mann River. A site for fv:yawkyawk mermaid spirit beings. Literally fv:ngal- 'female noun class', fv:malan '?' fv:djuhmeng 'jumped into the water'.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx ngalmalanjdirrihdirri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de an old female mimih spirit. She is not the same as ordinary mimih spirits. She is of Duwa moiety\
whereas other mimi spirits such as those carved by Kuningbal, Kurddal and Yalandja are said to be\
Yirridjdja. Ngalmalanjdirrihdirri is old and frail. She is of mischievous character and is said to appear\
before people travelling in the bush. She points in a particular direction in order to confuse people so\
that she becomes lost. Also she is said to reside in a grove of sand palms fv:Livistonia humilis with the\
special name fv:man-marrabbi. This is in the area just upstream(fv:'karrkad') from Barrihdjowkkeng in\
na-dankorlo clan estate. Ngalmalanjdirrihdirri is closely associated with fv:yawkyawk or female water\
spirits and is said to be their 'boss'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Ngalmanakku\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in the Tin Camp Creek region\
\\de Waterhole in the upper reaches of Tin Camp Creek. At the top of the Tin Camp Creek valley before it reaches the escarpment, two creeks form a confluence into the main creek. The northern branch is regarded as manbodjamun, a \'91sacred water\'92 creek. Ngalmanakku is on this creek between the confluence and the escarpment.  \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ngalmangeyi\
\\lx ngalmangiyi\
\\ps n.\
\\re northern snake-necked turtle\
\\de Northern snake-necked turtle.\
\\xv Ngalmangeyi barri-yawani nani midjno wanjh barri-weleng njamedmi wanjh barri-durrkmi barri-ngalkeyi.\
\\xe They used to look for northern snake-necked turtles and the burrows, they would whatsit, pull them up [out of the ground] when they found them.\
\\sc Chelodina rugosa / Macrochelodina oblonga\
\\uv W, Djnj\
\\ur I, E= komrdawh, Kdj= almangeyi\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 16/May/2014\
\
\\lx ngalmarndamarndayi\
\\va marndamarndayi\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd mammal\
\\de female antilopine wallaroo\
\\sc Macropus antilopinus\
\\pde karndayh\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngalme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de born\
\\xv Bolkkime nawu ngalmeng.\
\\xe Those (people) born today.\
\\xe Kaddum beh nakka Daddjurdu nungan djal ngarlmeng.\
\\sn 2\
\\de originate\
\\xv Kaddum beh nakka Daddjurdu nungan djal ngalmeng.\
\\xe The Daddjurdu ['severed leg'] spirit being originates from up there [upstream].\
\\sy kodjngalme\
\
\\lx ngalmekke\
\\ps pron.\
\\de she, that one (of females)\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx Ngalmim\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Ngalmolodubbe\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kardbam clan estate with fv:man-djabu sacred site and footprints in rock of the fv:Nakorrkko\
ancestor heroes.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngalmudj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de rainbow serpent\
\\de E\
\\sy ngalyod, bolung.\
\
\\lx Ngalmudjbebmeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de name of creek, 'small place' in Kubukkan district, fv:na-mirwi clan estate, near Namokardabu.\
\
\\lx ngalno\
\\va kodjngalno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de crown of head, top of skull\
\\xv Ngan-kodjngal-mang.\
\\xe he's taking a photo of the top of my head.\
\
\\lx ngalng\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge yabby\
\\re yabby\
\\re fi:Cherax_bicarinatus.\
\\de Freshwater yabby.\
\\sc Cherax sp. (possibly bicarinatus)\
\\sn 2\
\\de a term of reference used by a man about his sister. Usually fv:kodjngalng.\
\\pdn kk = ngalkayedyed\
\\ee affiliated with the fv:yirridjdja moiety and the fv:Yabburdurrwa ceremony; totemic site or fv:djang at fv:Ngalng_Djang near Mankorlod.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngal\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Acacia.sp.\
\\re fi:Acacia_auriculiformis\
\\de Black wattle, not common on the Arnhem Land plateau.\
\\sc Acacia auriculiformis\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= kalmang\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngalngarelyi\
\\ps n.\
\\re turtles (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de Freshwater turtles of various species, eg. snake-necked turtle and northern snapping turtle.\
\\pdv gun-gurrng\
\\pde komrdawh, ngard (I, E), ngalmangeyi, ngarderrhwo (W)\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\sd kun-kurrng\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Ngalngbali\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety Kunwinjku patriclan\
\\xv Na-yuhyungki Nawongberd, man-kung ken. Nawongberd na-Wamud na-Ngalngbali.\
\\xe An ancestor by the name of Nawongberd was associated with honey. Nawongberd was na-Wamud subsection and a Ngalngbali\
clansman.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 22/May/2007\
\
\\lx Ngalng Djarng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate, sacred site\
\\ee big place name, the hill being the raw orfv:kukno representation of the crustacean and the fresh water\
spring below the hill is the cooked or fv:man-djowleng representation.\
\\uv E\
\\uv I = Ngalngdjang\
\\lit "fresh-water yabby dreaming"\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Ngalngordbudjum\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site on an eastern tributary of the upper East Alligator river in an open valley. Ngalngordbudjum is not far upstream of where this tributary meets the East Alligator, about 47km southeast (upstream) from Cahill's Crossing near Kundjalerri Kayo. \
\\xv Manih yinan kabore Ngalngordbudjum. \
\\xe This creek [tributary to from east] goes to Ngalngordbudjum.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx ngaluka\
\\ps n.\
\\np phonetic realisation of fv:ngal-wuka\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg.1.my fv:kakkak, your wife, you and I call each other\
fv:mamamh. The reciprocal term is ngal-mulawarre. 2.My auntie (father's sister),\
your wife, you are my uncle. Reciprocal is fv:berlehberlongke. 3. My\
fv:ngal-kurrng, your wife, you are my uncle. 4.My auntie, your wife, you are my\
fv:kakkak. Reciprocal is fv:berlehberlongke.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Ngalurdbirrhmi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A gorge around 2km long with anbinik (Allosyncarpia ternata) jungle in the Kumarrirnbang estate. It is around the western border of this estate where it meets the Maburrinj estate, with Kumarrirnbang outstation about 33km to the east-northeast. This valley contains an important moon dreaming or fv:dird_djang which consists of a painting in an overhang called Dird Kakaberrkyo. The painting depicts the moon man. The name of the site means \'91I cleared the path\'92, a reference to the moon spirit making this gorge. Ngalurdbirrhmi is part of a traditional east-west walking track from the Maburrinj to Durlmangkarr estates.  \uc0\u8232 \\xv Mirurr arriyoy wanjh malahmalayi Ngalurdbirrhmi arriyoy. Kumekke-beh barrhbuni wanjh Berddolkko arriwam arriyoy arriderrehmi Mibarra.\u8232 \\xe We camped at Mirurr and then in the morning we went to Ngalurdbirrhmi and camped there. From there, at first light we walked to Berddolkko and then moved further to Mibarra.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ngalwadjamari\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de honey type found high up in trees\
\\sy ngalkarrngmari\
\\pde diyawarra\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngalwarddardomrdi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de female wallaroo or euro\
\\sc Macropus robustus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde wolerrk\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngalwarddedjenngorrmo\
\\ps n.\
\\de female black wallaroo\
\\sc Macropus bernadus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djukerre\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Ngalwanjdjarri\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site at the confluence of the upper East Alligator River and a western tributary, about 60km southeast (upstream) of Cahill's Crossing. The tributary creek itself may be called Ngalwanjdjarri Creek, following the Kunwinjku convention of describing watercourses by the sites at major confluences. The fault line which this creek flows down continues west-southwest from here to the Lightning Dreaming at Namimimnja.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx ngalwirnyi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Olive Python, Black-headed Python, Deaf Adder, or Green Tree Python.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde manjdjurdurrk, djurn, berk, kurrudjardu.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngalyod\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rainbow.serpent\
\\re rainbow serpent\
\\de Rainbow serpent, daughter of the Mother One Rainbow fv:Yingarna. The rainbow serpent is a central figure in traditional fv:Bininj religion. She is the creator of places and is active during the wet season and is asssociated with rain and bodies of water. Rainbow serpents live in deep waterholes and rivers. fv:Marrkidjbu are able to discern their presence and control them.\
\\ng The feminine prefix reflects the conception of the rainbow serpent as a  generative figure, 'the mother one'.\
\\xv Ngale Ngalyangdoh Belinj ngal-yuhyungki, ngal-Durlmangkarr en Bangardi na-djalyaw. Kondah ben-bayeng berrewoneng kabene-mudjkenhyo wanjh bolkki ngalyod bene-marnburrinj.\
\\xe Ngalyangdoh, of Belinj subsection was a Durlmangkarr clan member and her son, a Bangardi subsection boy. At that place here they were bitten and sank down into the country to become \'91dreaming\'92 and today they turned into rainbow serpents.\
\\sy ngalmudj\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 19/May/2014\
\
\\lx Ngalyod Kakukdjabdi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site on the so-called \'91Gumardir\'92 branch of the Goomadeer River in the Maburrinj estate. Site is around 2km southwest of the confluence of the Goomadeer and Gumardir Rivers.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ngalyurr\
\\ps n. insects\
\\de Australian spectacular grasshopper\
\\sc Petasida ephippigera\
\\uv Kune= namarden\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Ngamalanjdjuhmeng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in na-Kulmarru clan estate.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngambalalak\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de mudshell\
\\pde 1.ngardbakan 2. kurruk\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngambarlngambarl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de queenfish\
\\ee Kunbarlang= ngambarlngambarl\
\\bw As the queenfish is a salt water fish, this word is probably loaned from Kunbarlang language.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngamed\
\\cf see fv:njamed\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nganabbarru\
\\ps n.\
\\re water buffalo\
\\re buffalo\
\\de Water buffalo.\
\\ee Introduced species (from Timor in 1827), but has been incorporated into mythology as one of the manifestations of fv:ngalyod the rainbow serpent.\\pdn kk = badjorrokorrongko\
\\sc Bubalis bubalis\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Ngandarrayo\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Dangerous sacred site on the escarpment near Dilebang in na-Kulmarru clan estate.\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Ngandel\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Darnkorlo clan estate within the larger area called Bulkay on the Tomkinson River flood plain.\
Ngandel is the next identified site along the paperbark grove line north of the main camp at\
Mankodbekayo.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Nganderd\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Kune area, possibly fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\uv E, D, Djnj\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngandi\
\\lc na-ngandi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my father and also your father, but we call each other, fv:kakkak. To illustrate\
this using patrimoiety subsections, fv:bulanj can call fv:bangardi 'father', fv:ngarridjdjan can also call\
fv:bangardi 'father'. fv:Bulanj calls fv:ngarridjdjan fv:'kakkak'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngandi\
\\lc ngal-ngandi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my auntie or fv:berlu, your cousin or fv:ngal-kurrng, we call each other\
fv:kakkak. The reciprical is the same term.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngandjak\
\\lc kun-ngandjak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de nose, face, fishing hook\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-keb.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngandjakberberh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Sleepy Cod\
\\sc Oxyeleotris lineolata\
\\sn 2\
\\de Also possibly Flathead Goby\
\\sc Glossogobius giuris\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kabbungurr\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngandjakdjalarrk\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de Saltwater Crocodile\
\\sc Crocodilus porosus\
\\pde namanjwarre\
\\xv Ngandjakdjalarrk marndi kan-lawme.\
\\pde Namanjwarre wardi kan-baye.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngandjakorlhngandjakorlh\
\\va andjakorlh-andjakorlh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of grass\
\\xv Andjakorlhandjakorlh duwa yiman mardadubba.\
\\xe The andjakorlhandjakorlh grass is of the duwa moiety like the duwa fv:sorghum grass.\
\\sc unidentified\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngane-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 'we two-', 1st person dual exclusive intransitive pronominal prefix (1 unit augmented).\
\\xv Ngane-lobmeng.\
\\xe We (self and other) ran.\
\\sn 2\
\\de 1st person dual exclusive subject, 3rd person singular object (1 unit augmented/3 minimal)\
pronominal prefix.\
\\xv Ngane-djare.\
\\xe We (2) want it.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Non-verbal pronominal characteristic prefix.\
\\xv Ngane-kerrnge.\
\\xe We (2) are new.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nganeh-yo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de my wife/husband (lit. we sleep together)\
\
\\lx nganenghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be unco-operative, refuse permission, not allowing anything/something\
\\dv Dang-rayek, ka-ben-dahme.\
\\xv "Karrang, minj baleh ngarre?" "La bonj wanjh kan-bun ngarrku", wanjh\
ben-nganenghmeng bonj ben-nguneng yo ben-kudjihmeng bonj.\
\\xe "Mother where are we going to go?" " It's the end, it's going to eat us both." Then it wouldn't let them\
go, it ate them, and left them there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Ngankorlod\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Variant pronunciation of fv:Mankorlod which is said to originally have been in fv:Dangbon territory.\
\
\\lx nganngan\
\\lc man-nganngan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de unidentified plant, grows on flood plains, causes itching if touched. (seen growing at Bulkay,\
Tomkinson River district).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngangangh-ngangangh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Grey-crowned babbler\
\\sc Pomatostomus temporalis\
\\ee 'Ka-yime na-wakadj, na-wakadj' (It calls out,'Na-wakadj, na-wakadj').\
\\ee Ka-nganganghme.\
\\xe It calls out "ngangangh-ngangangh"\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngangarrbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de argue, talk roughly, swear.\
\\pde -dung\
\\xv Kabene-ngangarrburren.\
\\xe They are arguing with each other.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Ngangkan\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename in Bolkngok estate\
\\de Placename in Bolkngok estate\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx nganjboke\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd plant\
\\de the coming to seed of plants, especially grasses. The appearance of the seeds from the spear grass is a\
seasonal marker celebrated in fv:wurrurrumi song cycles used in public exchange ceremonies.\
\\xv Ka-nganjboke man-bedje.\
\\xe The spear grass is coming into seed.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nganjno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de waterlily tubers used to make waterlily cakes called fv:man-ko.\
\\sy djalahdjala\
\\pdn kk = man-birndalbirndal.\
\
\\lx nganjno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de waterlily seed pod\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx ngard\
\\ps n.\
\\re northern snapping turtle\
\\re fi:Elseya_dentata\
\\de Northern snapping turtle\
\\sc Elseya dentata\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= bamrdek, W= ngardderrhwo\
\\pdn kk = ngalngarelyi\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngardbakan\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re mudshell\
\\re mangrove bivalve, mudshell\
\\re fi:Geloina_coaxans\
\\de Large mangrove bivalve, also known as mudshell.\
\\pdn kk = ngambalalak\
\\sc Geloina coaxans\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\sn 2\
\\re knee cap\
\\de Knee cap.\
\\sd human body\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx an-ngarddenge\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Tricostularia_undulata\
\\de A perennial tussock forming sedge with thick roots to 90 cm high and flowers reddish brown in open spray on rigid three sided stems to 900 mm high. The name literally means \'91feet of short-neck turtle\'92 and may be a reference to the shape of the flowers.\
\\sc Tricostularia undulata\
\\uv Kdj\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 06/Mar/2016\
\
\\lx ngarddo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\ge snail\
\\re snail\
\\re land snail\
\\re Family Camaenidae (snails)\
\\re fi:Camaenidae (Family, snails)\
\\de Land snail, specifically the shell which was used to make dog collars.\
\\uv E\
\\ur W= duberrk, I= ngarlirrk\
\\sc Family Camaenidae\
\\sd gastropods\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngardduk\
\\ps poss.pron.\
\\de my, mine (variant pronunciation of fv:ngarduk.\
\
\\lx ngarddjerr\
\\ps n.\
\\re oyster type\
\\de Species of long oyster.\
\\sc ?\
\\uv W\
\\sd crustacean/shellfish\
\\dt 22/May/2014\
\
\\lx ngardderrhwo\
\\ps n.\
\\re northern snapping turtle\
\\de Northern snapping turtle\
\\sc Elseya dentata\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= ngard, Kdj= bamrdek\
\\pdn kk = ngalngarelyi\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 17/Aug/2014\
\
\\lx ngardmo\
\\lc kun-ngardmo\
\\va ngardmono\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de hip\
\\xv 'Kabirrim-wayudwayudme karri-kukkuk-kolungkolung karri-ngardmowelebwelebmeng.'\
\\xe They are coming and waving, let's get down and sway our hips.(These are the words of mimih songs.)\
\\nt CHECK -ngardmowelebme\
\
\\lx ngardmowelebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sway hips in dancing, gyrate\
\
\\lx ngarduk\
\\ps poss.pron.\
\\de my, mine\
\\uv E= ngardukki\
\\xv Na-ngale djirdmey man-me ngarduk?\
\\xe Who stole my food?\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarduk kokok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my older same sex sibling, your fv:kakkak, you are my fv:kakkak.\
\\cn na-mulebe.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarduk makka\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent fv:makka also,\
hearer calls referent same sex sibling.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngarduk mawa\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent for example\
daughter's son or daughter or fv:mawa, hearer calls referent in-law (eg Bulanj to Balang/Belinj)\
\\cn mawa.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarduk na-kurrngh/ngarduk ngal-kurrngh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my cousin or fv:na-kurrng/ngal-kurrngh, your son/daughter, we call each other\
fv:kakkak.\
\\cn na-kurrng ke/ngal-kurrng ke.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngardukki\
\\ps poss.pron.\
\\de my, mine\
\\uv E\
\\uv I= ngarduk\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarlabak\
\\lc kun-ngarlabak\
\\va ngarlabakno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de cheek (of face)\
\
\\lx ngarlabak-djorlok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de dimple\
\\lit hole in the cheek\
\
\\lx ngarlabme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de take a bath or shower\
\\xv Yi-rrokan yingarlabme kun-djurlkkinj.\
\\pde Yi-re kun-ronj yi-wurlebme.\
\\xe Go and have a swim in the water.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde wurlebme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarlhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de peel off, lift off a surface\
\\xv Ngarlengarlhmeng delek.\
\\xe The white paint has lifted off (the bark painting).\
\\sy kam-yerrkme\
\
\\lx ngarlirrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\ge snail\
\\re snail\
\\re land snail\
\\re Family Camaenidae (snails)\
\\re fi:Camaenidae (Family, snails)\
\\de Land snail, specifically the shell\
\\xv duruk birri-kom-dukkang korroko 'Aboriginal' birri-kom-dukkang wanjh ngarlirrk ngalbu yimeng 'lerre lerre lerre'.\
\\xe A long time ago, it was Aboriginal way to tie snail shells around the necks of dogs and they would make a sound jingle, jingle, jingle.\
\\uv I\
\\ur W= duberrk, E= ngarddo\
\\sc Family Camaenidae\
\\sd crustaceans/shellfish\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngarlkno\
\\cf see fv:ngalk\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngarn\
\\lc man-ngarn\
\\ps n. (impolite)\
\\sd body part\
\\de vagina\
\\xv Yim-ray ba marne-ngarn-ngun!\
\\xe Come here so I can have sex with you!\
\
\\lx ngarnarrbonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de speak in anger, swear, talk roughly to someone\
\\pde -dung.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngarnarrbonghmerren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de argue\
\\xv Yun ngurri-ngarnarrbonghmerren ngurri-warnmorrhmen.\
\\pde Yun ngurri-durren ngurri-bawo.\
\\pde -durren.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarnarrh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de black cockatoo\
\\sc Calyptorhynchus banksii\
\\uv Kune= karnamarr\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarnarrh\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Owenia.sp.\
\\re fi:Owenia_vernicosa\
\\de kind of medium sized tree (4-12m), the leaves can be used as an ichthycide\
\\sc Owenia vernicosa\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv ngarnarrh\
\\le red-tailed black cockatoo\
\\ee Red-tailed black cockatoos feed off the fruit of these trees, which has given rise to the polysemy. Sugar glider possums feed off the gum (or sap) of fi:Owenia vernicosa, but it is poisonous to humans, causing diarrhoea.\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= an-barnadja, E= man-ngarnarrngh, Djnj= an-barlarra\
\\sy ngukdjimbilin\
\\le fi:Owenia_vernicosa\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 25/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx ngarnarrngh\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Owenia.vernicosa\
\\re fi:Owenia_vernicosa\
\\de kind of small to medium sized tree (4-12m, no common name)\
\\sc Owenia vernicosa\
\\uv E\
\\ur Kdj= an-barnadja, I= man-ngarnarrh, Djnj= an-barlarra\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngarnkurl\
\\ps n.\
\\ge black.duck\
\\re pacific black duck\
\\de Pacific black duck.\
\\xv Yingundje kure ngarnkurl djang ka-rri.\
\\xe Yingundje is where the pacific black duck dreaming is situated.\
\\sc Anas superciliosa\
\\so MK and OK\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngarnmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place a spear thrower into the hole at the end of a spear or place a spear head or tip into the receptacle at\
the front of the spear shaft.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngarnno\
\\ps n.\
\\de receptacle or hole in the end of the shaft of a spear into which is placed the spear thrower.\
\
\\lx ngarirrihme\
\\va ngayirrihme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sn 1\
\\de be sick\
\\sn 2\
\\de die\
\\xv Birri-ngarirrihmeng ngarrben-djarlbelke karlakkarlak.\
\\pde Birri-doweng ngarrben-barnnameng karlakkarlak.\
\\xe When they died we put them up on death platforms.\
\\sn 3\
\\de be extinguished\
\\sn 4\
\\de be craving\
\\xv Kun-djule ngarri-ngarirrihme.\
\\pde Bakki ngarri-dowen.\
\\xe We're starving for tobacco.\
\\sn 5\
\\de laugh excessively\
\\xv Nga-yedjekmeng nga-ngarirrihmeng.\
\\pde Nga-djekmeng nga-rroweng.\
\\xe I laughed until it hurt.\
\\pde dowen.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge be.painful\
\\re painful, be\
\\de be in pain, to be hurting\
\\xv Nga-komngarkme.\
\\xe I have a sore throat.\
\\uv E\
\\ur I, W, Djnj= -babang\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Ngarunja\
\\va Ngarwunja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place near mouth of Liverpool River in area belonging to Kunib\'ccdji people. fv:Na-korrkko ancestor\
site.\
\\xv Ngarwunja rolk djang mak ngurrurdu djang.\
\\xe There are moggot and emu sacred sites at Ngarwunja.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Ngarwunja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de name of a Kunibidji estate in the mouth of the Liverpool River\
\\xv Ngarwunja kun-bolkngeykimuk bedberre birri-Manengkarerrbe.\
\\xe Ngarwunja is the estate name for the Manengkarerrbe clan people.\
\\xv Kun-kare dabborrabbolk konda Ngarwunja bilem birri-marnbom wanjh wubbunj njamed birri-marnbom Mankadjarra bin-bukkang.\
\\xe A long time ago the old people here at Ngarwunja used to make bark canoes and then the Macassans showed them how to make dugout canoes.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx ngarr-\
\\va arr-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 1st person dual inclusive intransitive pronominal prefix i.e. you and I.\
\\xv Ngarr-durndeng.\
\\xe Let's (you and I) go back.\
\\sn 2\
\\de 1st person dual inclusive subject, 3rd person singular object pronominal\
prefix i.e. you and I acting on he/she/it.\
\\xv Ngarr-bakkeng.\
\\xe We (you and I) broke it.\
\\gi Can also be used in a predicate sense on adjectives or nouns.\
\\xv Ngarr-ngeyko.\
\\xe You and I have the same name.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Ngarradj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de 'big place ' name in fv:Balngarra clan estate\
\\uv Kune/Dangbon\
\\ee duwa\
\\lit "sulphur-crested cockatoo"\
\\xv Ngarradj bolk-ngey-badjan.\
\\xe fv:Ngarradj is the name for a large district.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarradj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cockatoo\
\\re sulphur-crested cockatoo\
\\re white cockatoo\
\\re fi:Cacatua_galerita\
\\de Sulphur-crested cockatoo.\
\\sc Cacatua galerita\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 22/May/2014\
\
\\lx ngarradjberl\
\\pr an\
\\ps n.\
\\lit fv:ngarradj 'sulphur-crested cockatoo' fv:berl 'arm'\
\\ge herb.spp.\
\\re fi:Comelina_ensifolia\
\\re fi:Scavola_sp.\
\\re fi:Polymera_ambigua\
\\de various kinds of prostrate herbs with scrambling stems and delicate pink to purple flowers\
\\xv An-ngarradjberl meyak makka, ka-djalkobukobun.\
\\xe The fv:an-ngarradjberl herbs have no edible parts, they just have flowers.\
\\sc Comelina ensifolia, Scavola sp., Polymera ambigua\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngarradjku\
\\lc na-ngarradjku\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de matrilineal moiety name\
\\an na-mardku\
\
\\lx ngarradjku\
\\lc na-ngarradjku\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de one of the two matrimoiety names\
\\an na-mardku\
\\ee Each of the two matrimoieties is divided into two sub-matrimoieties. Na-ngarradjku is divided further\
into fv:yarriyarninj and fv:yarriburrik\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngarranjngarranj\
\\pr an-, \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Curcuma.australasica\
\\re fi:Curcuma_australasica\
\\de kind of perennial herb with edible roots\
\\xv An-worrwern ka-ngun, ka-bolkkarung mak an-nngamed ka-ngun, ngarranjngarranj. Yiman ka-yime yi-nang\
an-birrkarn yiman ka-yime birrkarn yi-bengkan manu. Ngarranjngarranj, anwarddeken. An-me nuye kunj.\
\\xe It [black wallaroo] eats many varieties of leaves and it also digs up the roots of fi:Curcuma_australasica. It's a plant similar to fi:Triglochin_dubia but it grows in the rock country. It is the food of the black wallaroo. \
\\sc Curcuma australasica\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx Ngarrarn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Waridjngu clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarrbek\
\\sy bambirl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de echidna\
\\sc Tachyglossus aculeatus\
\\pdn kk = ngalkadjeddjed\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngarre\
\\va ngarre\
\\mr (ng)arr+re > (ng)arre '1,2 minimal+go'\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re go, let's go (you and me)\
\\de Let's go (you singular and me).\
\\ng first person dual inclusive (1,2 minimal)\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\uv I, E = ngarre, W = ngarrre [ngarr+re]\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx ngarre\
\\ps poss. pron.\
\\ge 3sgFePOSS\
\\re possessive pronoun (third person singular)\
\\sn 1\
\\de Third person singular feminine possessive pronoun postposition; 'her, hers'\
\\gi Usually juxtaposed as an oblique postposition fv:ngaleng_ngarre 'hers/for her'. \
\\xv Ngaleng ngarre man-me.\
\\xe Her food.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Third person singular possessive pronoun. Need not mark a feminine possessor, though may agree with use of a feminine class demonstrative or pronoun which can be used for non-feminine reference. May also be used as a stand alone possessive pronoun (i.e. without juxtaposition with ngaleng or any other demonstrative or pronominal deictic). Note however, that the third person possessive male (human) pronoun is always fv:nuye and not fv:ngarre.\
\\xv Ngalengman kabbal mani manu ngarre Djarrdjarr man-kabo.\
\\xe This flood plain, this is the one associated with/belonging to the Djarrdjarr watercourse.\
\\xv Bininj karri-wungme, man-djewkbubuyika ngarre wanjh kunekke karri-mang kun-djak kure ku-wobekah kadberre. \
\\xe When we Aboriginal people smoke, some years later we will get diseases in our lungs.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge herOBL\
\\de Oblique pronoun used with a beneficiary or maleficiary noun phrase.\
\\xv Wanjh ngalyod wam kore kun-red ka-bolkngeyyo Mibukala dja bukminj ngarre.\
\\xe Then Ngalyod the Rainbow Serpent went to a place called Mibukala, but it dried up on her.\
\\sn 4\
\\de Anaphor marking topic association with a previously mentioned topic. Note that if there are two juxtaposed associated noun phrases linked to the previously mentioned associated topic, then the pronoun is reduplicated fv:ngarrengarre (see example below).\
\\xv Yiman ngad bininj wardi karri-bengwarre bu kabirrim-re kabirri-bolkkarung dja bu yiman kun-rorrekenh mak manu kukkukenh ngarrengarre.  \
\\xe So we Aboriginal people could become concerned/worried if they come and mine because of the associated environmental and water [management] issues.\
\\sd pronouns\
\\dt 28/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx man-ngarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge thicket\
\\re thicket\
\\re forest\
\\re bushes\
\\de Thick vegetation; bushland, dense forest, thickets.\
\\de Vegetation type- thicket or dense bushland. The type of predominant plant or tree can be positioned next to the term e.g. fv:man-ngarre_mi-binik 'fi:Allosyncarpia_ternata forest', fv:an-ngarre_an-murlmu 'forest of weeping paperbark trees'\
\\xv Nakka kunekke kunj ka-warlkkayindi kungarre.\
\\xe That kangaroo is there hiding in the bushes.\
\\gi incorporable\
\\xv Nabeh ngarri-bolkkuykme yerre Kukandja ka-rri Dilebang. Kuluban-keno, nawaran kumek ka-bidbun ka-yiyo. Ka-ngarreyiyo, Dilebang.\
\\xe There in our mother's country, back there at Kukandja, they [oenpelli pythons] are there. In the flying fox season, the Oenpelli pythons climb up [the trees] and lie there with the flying foxes. They lie there in the jungle with them [to eat them], there at Dilebang.\
\\cf ka-warddengarre\
\\ce jungle in a rocky environment\
\\xv Ka-warddengarre an-kokbo an-wern.\
\\xe A rock country jungle dominated by Arnhem Land rock cycad.\
\\uv W, E, I\
\\ur Djnj, Kdj= an-ngarre\
\\sn 2\
\\ge jungle\
\\re jungle\
\\re vine thicket, monsoon jungle\
\\de Jungle, monsoon vine forest.\
\\xv Kuluban kungarre njilhmi kure ka-kabokurrungbun.\
\\xe Flying foxes live in the jungle at freshwater springs and creeks which never dry out.\
\\cf man-barrarn man-ngarre\
\\ce Gorge with jungle/rainforest.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge brush\
\\re brush (vegetation), kindling\
\\de Vegetation in a general sense; brush, kindling, leaves and sticks.\
\\xv Birri-wurlhkeng, birri-wurlhkemeninj kun-djahkorl bordebmeninj wurlhkeng bonj man-ngarre kurrmeng na-wu bi-wurlhkeng bi-rurrkdabkeng.\
\\xe They lit a fire; they were lighting it with a fire drill stick, twisting it and then they put (dry) vegetation in to block him in the hole and they lit the fire [and burnt him].\
\\xv Ngale ngurrurdu ngarreno yedno ka-marnbun.\
\\xe Emu, she makes her nest out of vegetation [dry grass and leaves].\
\\se mi-ngarre\
\\de in the vine forest/thicket\
\\sy ku-ngarre\
\\xv Yika barrk djukerre mi-ngarre kabirri-di kure ku-rralk kabirri-karung kabirri-ni.\
\\xe Sometimes the black wallaroos stay in the thick bush, digging in the grass and standing there.\
\\cf ngarredjumbung\
\\ce small or short jungle, bushland or vegetation community of short shrubs or trees\
\\se ngarrekimuk\
\\de Large jungle or rainforest, extensive thicket or dense bushland.\
\\xv Ku-kabo an-ngarrekimuk.\
\\xe A creek line with thicket coverage.\
\\se ngarrekuyeng\
\\de tall jungle or rainforest\
\\se ngarrewern\
\\de 1. Lots of leaf litter and thick grass 2. thick bushland, dense vegetation thicket\
\\xv Ka-ngarrewern, nayin kah-di na-wern.\
\\xe There's lots of vegetation/leaf litter, there'll be lots of snakes.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 27/Feb/2010\
\
\\lx an-ngarre\
\\cf See fv:man-ngarre\
\
\\lx ngarrebarrhburrinj\
\\pr ka-, 0-\
\\va ba-ngarrebarrhbom, ngarrebarrhbom\
\\ps n. pred.\
\\ge closed.forest\
\\re closed canopy forest/jungle\
\\de Closed canopy forest or jungle thicket.\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 27/Feb/2010\
\
\\lx ngarrebidbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge climb.forest\
\\re climb up into jungle\
\\de Climb up into an area of thicket, or climb up trees in a jungle.\
\\xv Karri-ngarrebidbom.\
\\xe We climbed up into the jungle [area].\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngarremang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge get.kindling\
\\re get kindling\
\\re fetch kindling\
\\de Fetch kindling (usually for fire).\
\\xv Yi-ngarrema!\
\\xe Get some dry vegetation [to start the fire].\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngarrewerrhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge clear.brush\
\\re clear brush/undergrowth\
\\de Clear the bush/grass or undergrowth (usually to make camp).\
\\xv Ba-ngarrewerrhmi gun-marlaworr.\
\\xe She was clearing away/raking the leaves.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngarreyame\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge escape.into.bush\
\\re escape into bush/thicket\
\\de Escape into the bush; run into vegetation (usually to hide or escape).\
\\xv Ba-ngarreyameng mayhbang. \
\\xe The venomous snake slid off into the bush.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngarrewoneng\
\\ps ob.pron./poss.pron.\
\\de us (2 excl.), ours (2 excl.)\
\
\\lx ngarri-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 1st person plural exclusive (1 augmented) intransitive pronominal prefix.\
\\xv Ngarri-wam.\
\\xe We went.\
\\sn 2\
\\de 1st person plural exclusive subject, 3rd person singular object (1 augmented/3 minimal) pronominal\
prefix.\
\\xv Ngarri-nguneng.\
\\xe We ate it.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Non-verbal pronominal characteristic prefix.\
\\xv Ngarri-konamkuyeng.\
\\xe We are all tall.\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx ngarridj\
\\pref\
\\va na-wakadj\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku\
matri-moiety\
\\ng\
\\xv Mak Wurdanke ngarri-nameng, nakka ngarri-bom ngarri-kudjihmeng \
kunj karndakidj la karndakarndayh. Ngarridj yi-bengkan? Kakodbebuldi kah-di. \
Nakka bom kudjihmeng mako nawid manih.\
\\xe At Wurdanke we made a fire drive there once and we killed a heap of male and female antilopine kangaroos. \
You know Ngarridj? He lives at Kakodbebuldi. He killed so many but not with a gun, but with this (gestures indicating a spear).\
\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd kinship\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W, Kdj= na-wakadj\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx ngarridj\
\\pr na-\
\\va balang\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:duwa patri-moiety and  fv:ngarradjku matri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and  fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv Eh eh korroko yakminj..... wanjh nakka bene-danginj nawu ngaye na-ngarridj  na-wamud bene-danginj en ngabbard nawu bene-danginj bekodj dabborrabbolk birri-danginj. \
\\xe No he finished a long time ago... and they were both brothers, that is my father na-ngarridj and na-wamud (through a skewed relationship) and so (I call them both) father, because the old people could be siblings (through a skewing rule).\
\\sd kinship\
\\so Jacob Nayinggul\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I, E, Djnj=fv:balang\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx ngarridj\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr al-\
\\va belinj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:duwa patri-moiety and  fv:ngarradjku matri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and  fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv A:Yi-marnbom bu ngal-Ngarridj ngandi-marnedjirdmey ngarrewoneng.   B: Njale?   \
A: Barri-djirdmey, namekke nawu\
yi-marnbom yi-munkeweng.\
\\xe A: You made it for both of us, but ngal-Ngarridj stole it from us.    B: What?   A: They stole the one you made and sent.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I, E, Djnj=fv:belinj\
\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx ngarridjdjan\
\\pref\
\\va ngal-wakadj, al-wakadj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku\
matri-moiety\
\\xv Djal anekke bani-boken kabanih-ni ngal-Wakadj, Ngarridjdjan Ngarridjdjan, Kamarrkawarn. \
\\xe Just those two living there, ngal-Wakadj (alternatively called) Ngarridjdjan and Ngarridjdjan, at Kamarrkawarn.\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W= ngal-wakadj, Kdj= al-wakadj \
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx ngarrkardba\
\\va marrkardba\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bee.sp.\
\\re fi:Tetragonula_hockingsi\
\\de Kind of native stingless bees and the honey produce. Ngarrkardba bees, although stingless are more aggressive than other fi:Tetragonula species and can give a small nip with their mandibles.\
\\xv Ngarri-kuyinworhnan ka-rrurndeng namekke None, ka-nan an-kung. Arri-kuyinnan oh ngarrkardba, aleh ngarrkardba ba-nang None.\
\\xe We'd be about to start looking around and None [honey wasp] would go back and look at the honey. We could hardly see it [in the distance] and we'd call out, "Oh ngarrkardba honey, None has found ngarrkardba!"\
\\sc Tetragonula hockingsi\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I, E= diwarra, Kdj= marrkardba, W= kubulah\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngarrken\
\\ps n.\
\\de baby, very young baby, still at nursing stage.\
\
\\lx ngarrkidjba\
\\va marrkidjba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de spear type, with multiple barbs running in a line down one side of the shaft.\
\
\\lx ngarrkkang\
\\lc na-ngarrkkang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent fv:kangkin or\
nephew (sister's son), hearer calls referent brother's son (referent calls hearer fv:berlu).\
\\cn na-rroyngu.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarrkkang\
\\lc ngal-ngarrkkang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent niece (sister's\
daughter), hearer calls referent niece (brother's daughter)\
\\cn ngal-doyngu.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarrkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de be successful in obtaining large numbers of hunted game, fish or fruit and vegetable\
foods\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarrkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\re hurting, feel pain\
\\re pain (v.i.)\
\\de Feel pain or sore.\
\\uv E\
\\ur I= -ngalhme, W= -babang\
\\sn 2\
\\pdv kk\
\\de Feel pain or ache.\
\\pde babang, ngalhme\
\\xv Nga-kunngarrkme.\
\\pde Nga-bidbabang.\
\\xe My finger hurts.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngarrku\
\\ps ob.pron./poss.pron.\
\\de us (you sing. and me), ours (for you and me).\
\
\\lx ngarrnghmak\
\\ps adj.\
\\de route through rocky dissected gorge country which successfully leads out of the enclosed stone\
country\
\\xv Kangarrnghmak, ngarrwi ngarrdjale ngarrbebme kuwadda.\
\\xe It's a good route out of the gorges, if we keep going we'll arrive back at the camp.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngarrnghmang\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de find a route through stone country with many dissected gorges and narrow passes\
\\xv Anbarrarn yika kabarrarnwarre marrek bale karriyime karringarrnghmang.\
\\xe Some gorges are no good to walk through, sometimes the gorge comes to a dead end and we can't find\
a route through it.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngarrnghwarre\
\\ps adj.\
\\de route through rocky dissected gorge country which ends in a dead end\
\
\\lx nga-wirmeng\
\\cf see fv:wirmeng\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngawkbun-\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de yawn\
\
\\lx an-ngawokngawok\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Breynia_cernua\
\\de Bushy evergreen shrub or small tree to 4 m high. The edible fruits are smooth nearly globular thinly fleshed berries, 4-8 mm diameter, pink or red turning black when ripe with several brown triangular seeds embedded in the flesh. The fruits are available from fv:kudjewk to fv:bangkerreng. This tree is sometimes confused with fi:Bridelia_tomentosa because the fruits are similar in appearance.\
\\sc Breynia cernua\
\\uv Kdj, Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngaye\
\\ps pron.\
\\ge I\
\\re I, me\
\\de first person singular free standing pronoun, I/me.\
\
\
\\lx ngayeman\
\\ps refl.pron.\
\\de myself\
\\xv Ngayeman ngarduk!\
\\xe That's my own business!\
\\dt 29/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx ngayemanwale\
\\va ngayemanale\
\\ps ?\
\\de my turn (to have a go)\
\
\\lx ngayeng\
\\lc na-ngayeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi term, 'my son' to any hearer.\
\\nt check ngayen?\
\
\\lx ngayeng\
\\lc ngal-ngayeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi term, 'my daughter' to any hearer.\
\\xv Ngal-ngayeng ka-warre ngan-marnedoweng korroko ngarri-barrkbombarrkbom.\
Ngurrim-ray karri-marnenalkbun.\
\\xe (words to a song) My daughter has died, we have been grieving all through the night until dawn. Come\
all of you and let us wail for her.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngayhno\
\\ps n.\
\\de wild honey bee hive\
\
\\lx ngayi\
\\va ngaye\
\\ps pron.\
\\de I, me (1st pers. sing.)\
\\xv Ngayi wanjh nga-mungu.\
\\xe Well I'm not to blame.\
\\uv W=ngaye\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngayke\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\re daybreak\
\\de Sunrise, daybreak.\
\\xv Ba-ngaykeng ngurri-dolkka!\
\\xe It's just before dawn, get out of bed!\
\\sn 2\
\\re stay awake until dawn\
\\de Stay awake at night, until dawn breaks.\
\\xv Karri-ngayke, njale o dedjdjumbung karri-dadjdje?\
\\xe What will we do, stay up till dawn or cut things short (and go to sleep).\
\\uv I, E, Djnj, Kdj\
\\dt 07/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx ngeh-dadjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de stop breathing 2. lose one's breath (eg. asthma attack)\
\
\\lx ngelemerrk\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Cynanchum.pedunculatum\
\\re fi:Cynanchum_pedunculatum\
\\de kind of plant, with an edible fruit sometimes known by the common name 'four-corner fruit'\
\\sc Cynanchum pedunculatum\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngenmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge place.axilla.scent\
\\re underarm smell ritual\
\\de put scent from the axilla on OBJ\
\\xv Yibenkadjung yawurrinj ngundingenmang dabborrabbolk.\
\\xe You follow the other boys, the elders will put their armpit scent on you.\
\\ee This ritual is performed to protect those who are new to a place or ceremonial neophytes. The hand is\
rubbed inside the axilla and then rubbed against a person or object. Placing one's armpit smell on a\
ceremonial object is done to ensure that no spiritual harm will come to the person who uses or sees the\
object for the first time. The person's underarm smell makes them 'familiar' to the place or object in\
question and no harm will then come to them.\
\\dt 21/Apr/2004\
\
\\lx ngerdken\
\\lc ka-ngerdken\
\\ps adj.\
\\de Pregnant.\
\\sy Ka-yaw-kan, ka-merlem.\
\
\\lx ngerbungerbu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de barramundi fingerling\
\\xv Ngerbungerbu yiman namindjibuk, la na-yahwurd duninj.\
\\xe fv:Ngerbungerbu is the name for barramundi fingerlings, like fv:namindjibuk but really the smallest ones.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngerh\
\\lc kun-ngerh\
\\ps n.\
\\de breath, breathing\
\
\\lx ngerhdadjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de to have short wind, lose one's breath\
\
\\lx ngerhme\
\\va ngehme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de breath\
\\xv Karri-nang yimarnek doweng ba ngalmak ngehmeng.\
\\xe We saw her (the buffalo) and thought she was dead but she was still breathing OK.\
\\uv I\
\\uv W= ngehme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngerrburren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de rub/scratch self against something (to relieve itch, or to place scent)\
\\xv Barrk djukerre kabirri-ngerrburren mingohngongohngo.\
\\xe The black wallaroos scratch themselves/place their scent in the rock pandanus groves.\
\\uv Djnj, I, W\
\
\\lx ngey\
\\lc kun-ngey\
\\ps n.\
\\de name\
\\xv Ngarri-ngey-kurrmeng.\
\\xe We gave him/her/it a name.\
\\xv Ngal-ngey-kuyengkuyeng.\
\\xe She has a long name.\
\
\\lx ngeybimburren\
\\ps v.t. (reflexive)\
\\de write your name\
\\sy -ngey-namerren\
\
\\lx ngeybininj\
\\pr kun-\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge Aboriginal name\
\\re Aboriginal name\
\\de a person's traditional Aboriginal name as opposed to their nickname or their\
fv:Balanda name\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Ken! Nga-djalohngeybom kun-ngeybininj ke.\
\\xe Oops! I've just called your Aboriginal name.\
\\ee As a generalisation, a person's fv:kun-ngeybininj is usually a private name not used\
in everyday reference or address. Sometimes a parent may address their child by\
their fv:kun-ngeybininj. A more appropriate way to address or refer to someone is by\
their subsection name.\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 15/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx ngeybun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de call a name, say the name of something.\
\\xv Marrek karri-ngeybun namekke, na-djamun.\
\\xe We don't say that word/name, it's secret.\
\
\\lx ngey-ko\
\\ps n.\
\\de namesake, term referring to person with the same name.\
\\xv Ngey-ko yim-ray.\
\\xe Come here my namesake.\
\\xv Bene-ngey-ko.\
\\xe Those two with the same name.\
\
\\lx ngimen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go inside\
\\xv Yim-ngimen!\
\\xe Come inside.\
\\xv Ngurrim-ngimen ka-rrangrurrk.\
\\xe Come in, the door's open.\
\\xv Ngalkno ka-ngihngimen bodno.\
\\xe Bees keep entering the entrance tube (to the bee hive).\
\
\\lx ngimiwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de insert through a hole\
\\xv Yim-ngimiwemen!\
\\xe Bring it through the hole.\
\
\\lx ngingerrehme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge squash\
\\re squash\
\\de squash something\
\\xv Bu yi-ngingerrehme dan ka-banj wanjh.\
\\xe If you squash a stink bug it will give off a smell.\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx ngirrburren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\de Rub body against something, scratch by rubbing against\
\\xv Nganabbarru ka-ngirrburren bim ka-warrehwarrewon.\
\\xe Buffaloes rub themselves up against the (rock) paintings and ruin them.\
\
\\lx ngirrihme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de grind one object against another. Eg. the grinding of ochre on a stone palette to produce paint or the rubbing of sandpaper.\
\\xv Kano man-yarrngeyarrnge nga-ngirrihme.\
\\xe Give me some sandpaper fig (leaves), I'll rub this down.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngobarn\
\\lc kun-ngobarn\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pandanus_sheath\
\\re pandanus leaf sheath\
\\de Central sheath of new pandanus leaves\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Pandanus spp. (spiralis)\
\\cf -ngobandurrkmang\
\\cf -ngobanbidmang\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngobarnbidmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge split_pandanus\
\\re split pandanus leaves\
\\de split pandanus leaves with index finger and thumb\
\\xv Arri-ngobanbidmang arri-yirrme an-yakngarra. Ngad daluk arri-yirrme.\
\\xe We split the pandanus leaves and pull them apart. We women do the peeling apart (of the pandanus).\
\\ee The splitting of new pandanus leaf shoots is done by women as part of the process of making fibre for dilly bags and string. The central pandanus leaf sheaths are harvested with a hooked stick called\
fv:man-marli and then the individual leaf layers are split using the fingers and fingernails.\
\\cf kun-ngoban\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngobarndurrkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge pluck_pandanus_sheath\
\\re pull pandanus leaf sheath\
\\de pull out the central sheath of new pandanus leaves, usually with a hooked stick\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngobarnyirrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re split pandanus leaves\
\\de Split pandanus leaves in preparation for drying, dyeing and weaving them.\
\\xv Ngalkamarrang dja ngalkudji ngalkukbele tourist kabenehni kabihbukkan bu kabenehngobarnyirrme.\
\\xe Ngalkamarrang is sitting with a tourist, showing her as they split pandanus leaves.\
\\dt 04/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx ngodme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de feel subdued during illness\
\\xv Ka-ngodme kah-dowen.\
\\xe He's sick and feeling subddued.\
\
\\lx ngodmiyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lie down subdued\
\\xv Nungka ka-ngodmiyo. Kare njale bi-bayeng.\
\\xe He's lying down subdued. I wonder what's affecting him.\
\
\\lx ngohngo\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Pandanus.basedowii\
\\re fi:Pandanus_basedowii\
\\re rock pandanus\
\\re pandanus that grows in rock country\
\\de Rock pandanus.\
\\xv Ka-ngun an-ngohngo, an-karrarndalk, an-karrarndjalhkarrarndjalh ka-ngun.\
\\xe It (the black wallaroo) eats the rock pandanus, and spinifex grasses (fi:Triodia_microstachia and another).\
\\sc Pandanus basedowii\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I, E= man-ngokngo, W= man-kudjek, Kdj= an-morre\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngokdan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de beome dark, nightfall\
\\xv Karri-re werrk ka-ngokdan.\
\\xe Let's hurry up and go, it's getting dark.\
\\pdn kk = monamen\
\
\\lx ngokkowi\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de dusk, evening\
\\xv Ngaleng wayarra ku-wardde ka-yo wanjh ngokkowi kabirri-bebme kabirri-re.\
\\xe This spirit, she lives inside the rock and at dusk they all appear and go off.\
\\cf ngokkongokkowi\
\\ce after sunset, evening.\
\\uv I\
\\sn 2\
\\de yesterday\
\\xv Yibengkan kunred nawu ngokkowi karri-wam?\
\\xe You know that place we went to yesterday?\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx ngokngo\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Rock Pandanus\
\\sc Pandanus basedowii\
\\uv I\
\\ur Djnj= an-ngohngo\
\\pdn kk = kun-yaril\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngokngok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 1\
\\de The name fv:ngokngok is used as the generic term for all owl type birds, including frogmouths. However, in some contexts it is used to refer to all Ninox spp. and contrasts with other terms such as fv:kuluyhkuluy, 'tawny frogmouth' and fv:yerinj, 'barn owl'. In Kunwinjku this generic name is now also used for the southern boobook which was formerly known more specifically as fv:korddol.\
\\sn 2\
\\de barking owl\
\\sc Ninox connivens\
\\ur Kdj= mukmuk\
\\sn 3\
\\de rufous owl (but may have other more specific names such as fv:korrdjdjok in Kundedjnjenghmi)\
\\sc Ninox rufa\
\\ee REM= korrbboh\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngol\
\\lc kun-ngol\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de cloud\
\
\\lx ngolbbon\
\\lc man-ngolbbon\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de monsoon forest tree\
\\sc ?\
\\nt CHECK (seen at Namorromo)\
\
\\lx ngolbbon\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Eucalyptus.jensenii\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_jensenii\
\\de kind of Eucalyptus\
\\xv An-ngolbbon an-kurlahrayek.\
\\xe The fi:Eucalyptus_jensenii tree has hard bark.\
\\sc Eucalyptus jensenii\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Lophopetalum.arnhemicum\
\\re fi:Lophopetalum_arnhemicum\
\\de kind of tree tree, 8-15m high, common in monsoon vine forests growing in deep sand\
\\sc Lophopetalum arnhemicum\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngolinj\
\\ps n.\
\\de beeswax, cerumen\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx Ngolinjkakoni\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de small water hole/spring near Namokardabu in fv:na-born country.\
\
\\lx ngolkkerren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de warm oneself by the fire\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kuwan.\
\\xv Kun-mimal nga-ngolkkerren.\
\\xe I'll warm myself by the fire.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngolngolke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cook something on top of the coals of a gentle fire (no flame).\
\\cf see fv:wilkdeng, fv:larrkinje\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngolomorro\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de northern nail-tail wallaby\
\\sc Onychogalea unguifera\
\\sy djodded, djoded\
\\uv E, Djnj\
\
\\lx ngolwaken\
\\lc kun-ngolwaken\
\\ps n.\
\\de aeroplane (literally 'in the clouds').\
\
\\lx Ngolwarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place near the Liverpool River crossing (fv:Kubarledjawoy).\
\
\\lx Ngolowerre\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Creek area in the Kudjekbinj estate. The creek which travels past Kudjekbinj outstation is met by a tributary creek from the east about 1.5km south of the outstation. Ngolowerre begins about a kilometre up this short creek, and includes a jungle area with a population of flying foxes. The two brothers-in-law Ngurdyawok and Nawalabik placed a didjeridu and clapsticks here. \uc0\u8232 \\xv Ngurdyawok Nawalabik benekurrmeng mako dja manberlnginj Ngolowerre.\u8232 \\xe Ngurdyawok and Nawalabik placed a didjeridu and clapsticks at Ngolowerre\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ngomin\
\\lc noun class/PRON.ngomin\
\\ps adj.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de one\
\\pde -kudji.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngordo\
\\lc na-/ngal-ngordo\
\\ps n.\
\\de leper\
\
\\lx ngordomen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become crippled, get leprosy\
\\xv Marrek nga-ngun wardi nga-ngordomen.\
\\xe I cannot eat that food otherwise I might become crippled.\
\
\\lx ngordo,\
\\lc kun-ngordo,\
\\de leprosy, deformity\
\\xv Kare daddubbe-ni kare kun-ngordo karrmeng.\
\\xe Maybe he was crippled, maybe he just had some deformity.\
\\cf -ngordomen\
\\ce v.i., to contract leprosy, become deformed\
\
\\lx ngorlihme\
\\va -ngolihme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de style of walking peculiar to women, moving the hips whilst walking slowly. Appears also in\
fv:dedj-ngolihme, to shake one's bum as in dancing.\
\\xv Kabirri-dedj-ngolihngolihme daluk.\
\\xe The women are shaking their bums in the dance.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngoreng\
\\ps adj.\
\\de deformed\
\\xv bid-ngoreng\
\\xe deformed finger (this is actually somebody's nickname)\
\
\\lx ngorrbardmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de carry game such as macropods by the legs up on one's shoulders.\
\
\\lx ngorrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge waist\
\\re waist\
\\de waist\
\\xv Ku-ngorrk ngan-dadjkeng kun-ronj.\
\\xe The water came up to my waist.\
\\sn 2\
\\pr ku-\
\\ge middle\
\\re middle\
\\re half way\
\\de middle, half way\
\\xv Yi-borrahkendo ku-ngorrk.\
\\xe Fill the container up half way.\
\\sd body part\
\
\\lx ngorrkkali\
\\pr ku-\
\\ge mid-scree\
\\re middle of scree promontory\
\\de half way down a scree slope or escarpment which juts out as an inland promontory.\
\\xv Wirrhwirrmi kun-rodjbedjahdjam ku-ngorrkkali karri-ngalke.\
\\xe At Wirrhwirrmi where there is red ochre, we can find it half way down the promontory falling from the escarpment.\
\
\\lx ngorrkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de carry on shoulders\
\\cf Yim-ngorrmang\
\\ce Carry it here (up on shoulders).\
\\pdn kk = ngorrmimodme\
\
\\lx ngorrkbelh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, 1.speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent son or\
daughter, hearer calls referent father or father's sister\
\\sn 2\
\\de My sister's daughter/son, your wife's mother/uncle, you are my fv:mamamh.\
\\de My mother/mother's brother, your daughter or son, you and I call each other fv:mamamh.\
\\cn ngorrkberlko.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngorrkbelko\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term,1.speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent father or\
father's sister , hearer calls referent son or daughter.\
\\sn 2\
\\de My fv:ngal-kurrng, your sister's daughter, you are my mother's father.\
\\cn ngorrkbelh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngorrmimodme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de carry on shoulders\
\\xv Nga-yi-rukmeng nga-ngorrmimodmeng.\
\\pde Nga-yi-dolkkang nga-ngorrmey.\
\\xe I got up and carried it on my shoulders.\
\\pde 1. -ngorrmang. 2. -ngorrkan\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngorrobonghke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de break and tie legs of a macropod up ready to cook on a fire\
\\pde ngorrowke.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx ngorrolokko\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de familiar name for the male euro\
\\sc Macropus robustus.\
\
\\lx ngorrongorrombun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de rub OBJ between the palms of the hands\
\\xv Waddanmerre arri-ngorrongorrombuni arri-wungmeni.\
\\xe We used to rub the leaves of fv:Croton arnhemicus between the palms of our hands and then smoke it.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx ngorrowke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge break.legs\
\\re break kangaroo legs for cooking\
\\de break the legs of a macropod at the knee in order to tie the legs to the forearms so as to facilitate cooking\
\\xv Djalwam la djorlmeng birri-kinjeng birri-ngorrowkeng birri-kinjeng rowk.\
\\xe He kept going straight up, they tied up the legs of the kangaroo for cooking and cooked it all.\
\\xv Birri-malakakdoy man-kole, birri-yameng korroko. dabborrabbolk birri-yami birri-yingkikoluy bonj \
birri-bardngorrkemeninj birri-kinjemeninj birri-darmeninj.\
\\xe They would rise early in the morning and spear them, a long time ago. The 'old people' [previous generations] would spear [the\
kangaroos] and come down carrying them on their shoulders, break the legs and tie them up and cook them, flavouring the meat with\
herbs.\
\\pdn kk = ngorrowbonghke.\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx ngowkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge grind\
\\re grind\
\\de grind on a grindstone or flat rock surface\
\\xv An-dirnku arri-ngowkme an-me ka-karrme.\
\\xe The cycad has food, we grind it (the fruit).\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx ngowkngowk\
\\lc man-ngowkngowk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Gomphrena canescens\
\
\\lx ngoyngoymi\
\\lc kun-ngoyngoymi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de water splashing down a water course\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx ngoyongoyo\
\\ps n.\
\\re ornate burrowing frog\
\\de Nickname for frog species which burrow under the ground such as the Ornate Burrowing Frog.\
\\sc Limnodynastes ornatus\
\\xv Yibba, ngoyongoyo ka-kodjkeyo, kodjdjewarre kabirri-merlemyembun. Ku-kurlk ka-yo.\
\\xe The Ornate Burrowing frog and other burrowing frogs sleep, hibernating, they rub their abdomens (when they bury themselves). They sleep in the ground.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngoxngo\
\\lc man-ngoxngo\
\\ph the 'x' represents a voiceless velar fricative which appears in Kune dialect.\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de stone country pandanus\
\\sc Pandanus basedowii\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx ngudberre\
\\ps ob./poss.pron.\
\\de you (3+), yours (3+)\
\
\\lx ngudda\
\\ps pron.\
\\de you (2nd. pers. sing.)\
\
\\lx nguddangke\
\\va ngudda ke\
\\ps poss.pron.\
\\de yours (sing.)\
\\uv E= ungke\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngudman\
\\ps refl.pron.\
\\de you all, yourselves (2+)\
\
\\lx ngudj\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge power\
\\re physical power\
\\de power, stamina, physical energy, bodily strength\
\\ng incorporable\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx ngudjbakke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr ngudj+bakke 'strength-break'\
\\ge overpower\
\\re overpower\
\\de overpower, wear down, cause to tire\
\\xv Nane ngarri-yami, bad ngudjbang nakka minj ngarri-ngudjbakkeyi belb belb belb kurrb ka-ni. Ku-rurrk ka-ngimen.\
\\xe We used to spear this one (the short-eared rock wallaby), but it is extremely fast and we can't wear it down, hop hop hop, it pops inside\
and sits there. It sits in a cave.\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx ngudjbang\
\\ps adj.\
\\mr ngudj+bang 'strength+powerful/intense'\
\\ge fast\
\\re fast moving\
\\de fast moving, moves with power and speed\
\\xv Yiman kayime wularla nangamed nangamenani wurlungurluh namekke ngeybokenh. Kabirringeybun ngabudj.Kebdjumbung nawu. Namekke. Yiman ka-yime kornobolo bad ngudjbang. \
\\xe There is a wallaby similar to the spectacled hair wallaby, whatsit, it has two names, the nail-tailed wallaby. They call it fv:ngabudj. It has a smaller snout that one. That's it. It's like an agile wallaby, but really very fast moving.\
\\ee an adjective which can qualify nouns such as humans, animals, and machines such as cars, boats, planes etc\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx ngudjbawon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr ngudj+bawon 'power-leave'\
\\ge outrun\
\\re outrun\
\\de outrun, leave behind (in a chase)\
\\xv Birri-ngudjbang kunj nawarddeken, minj bale ka-yime bu dalkken ka-benngudjkadjung kuwardde, kayakki, kabirri-ngudjbawon kunj.\
\\xe The rock country kangaroos are very fast moving and a dingo would not be able to chase them into the rocks, no, the kangaroos would\
leave it behind.\
\\xv Djamun bi-djorrhmayinj la lobmeng bi-ngudjbawong.\
\\xe The policeman tried to grab him but he ran away and escaped from him\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx ngudjbebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr ngudj+bebme 'stamina+arrive/appear'\
\\ge arrive\
\\re complete journey\
\\de arrive at a destination by use of one's own stamina\
\\xv\
Njamed duleno namekke ka-kadjung wayini wam nungka Bulanj wayini wam namekke duleno ka-karrme.  Wam ken\
borrkkeng wam kun-djulng marnbom yiman murrikang karri-yurruburdihme.  Yiman birri-kodjyimeng na-wern rerre\
bininj bad nungka na-djalkudjihkudji ngudjbebmeng. \
\\xe He started to sing and Bulanj went off singing songs that he knew. Then he started dancing and raised dust just like when a truck\
drives along. Everyone thought that there was lots of people there but there was only Bulanj who arrived all by himself [to deceive\
them].\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx ngudjkuyeng\
\\ps adj.\
\\mr ngudj+kuyeng 'stamina/power-long'\
\\ge tireless\
\\re tireless\
\\de tireless, having boundless energy\
\\xv Njamed nakka, yukyuk. Mayh nawu yahwurdurd. Kumekke ka-djale ka-wakewake nakka ngudjkuyeng.\
\\xe That whatsit, the sandstone shrike-thrush. It's a small bird. It just keeps on and on [looking for ticks on black wallaroos] crawling all\
over [the kangaroo], it is tireless.\
\\so LBN in black wallaroo text\
\\an ngudjwarre\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx ngudjwarre\
\\ps adj.\
\\mr ngudj+warre 'energy/strength-bad'\
\\sn 1\
\\ge weak\
\\re weak, tired out, exhausted\
\\de weak, without sufficient strength, frail from old age\
\\xv Andorrk Karri, kumekke djenj karrurndeng. Kumeng djenj ka-re nakerdmi kumekke karrurndeng. Anngalkkuyeng,\
kaluk marrek bale kayime djenj karrolkan ya ngudjwarre, dunbuhman\
\\xe At Andorrk Karri, the fish turn around and go back [because of a waterfall]. The black bream go up to there and turn back. It is a high\
cliff face and they are unable to jump up, yeah, they are too weak, the black bream.\
\\sn 2\
\\re lazy\
\\de lazy\
\\xv Wanjh wurdurd ngarduk barri-ngalmeni yoh barri-bebmeni but ngudjwarrengong marrek ngaban-nan\
barri-durrkmirri. \
\\xe When all my children appeared [were born and grew up], yes, they all appeared but they are all lazy and I've never seen them do any\
work.\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx ngudjwarremen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr ngudj+warremen 'strength+become.bad'\
\\ge become.weak\
\\re weaken, become frail\
\\de become weak from lack of energy, illness or old age\
\\xv Kabani-burren wanjh kabani-ngudjwarremen, nungan ka-yerrkan kure ngalbininjkobeng, nungan ka-yerrkan\
ku-buyika kuni ka-ni. Marrek kabi-marnekan kayakki.\
\\xe The two [male black wallaroos] fight each other until they get exhausted and then one will go and sit down near the female mate and\
the other will go away somewhere else. He was not able to steal the female, no.\
\\xv Nganem-djaldurndi nganeh-djaldi ngah-djalnahnang wernhngudjwarrehwarreminj, djalam wanjh bu baleh yimerranj\
yimeng nakohbanj ngarri-kurrmeng nawu Manmoyi, kunred kume ngarrwoneng.\
\\xe When we both came back to live here, we have stayed put and I looked after him [the old man] as he became extremely frail and when\
he was unable to continue on [and died]  we buried that old man here at Manmoyi in our [and his] country.\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx ngudjyurrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge overtake\
\\re overtake\
\\de catch up with and pass when running or travelling in the same direction\
\\xv Ngun-ngudjyurrhkeng.\
\\xe She ran past you [in the athletics race].\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx nguk\
\\lc kun-nguk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de guts, offal\
\\pdn kk = man-njam\
\
\\lx ngukbak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de spangled drongo\
\\sc Dicrurus bractearus\
\\uv Kune = yakyak\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngukbarrk\
\\pr kun-\
\\va ngukbarrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge stomach\
\\re stomach\
\\de stomach\
\\sd body part\
\\dt 23/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx ngukdeng\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de shit, 2.fart\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx ngukdirrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de shit or fart loudly\
\\xv Dowkkeng mako wanjh kornobolo ngukdirrhmeng kukwurrhkerrinj.\
\\xe He fired the shotgun and the wallaby shit itself and jumped up in fright.\
\
\\lx ngukdudme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge belly.swell.up\
\\re swell up (internal organs)\
\\de internal digestive organs swell up\
\\xv Kun-waral kun-burddji ngun-mang bardakikkik yi-ngukdudme wardi.\
\\xe If your shadow falls on the rock resin, it can capture your body smell and your internal organs can swell up.\
\\sd body part\
\\sy nguklurlme\
\\uv E\
\\ur I, W= nguklurlme\
\\dt 25/Aug/2007\
\\co\
\
\\lx ngukdumeno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de lower back\
\
\\lx ngukdjarrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pass a noisy loose motion or 'sloppy fart'\
\
\\lx ngukdjimbilinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of small to medium sized tree (4-12m)\
\\sc Owenia vernicosa, Owenia reticulata\
\\uv I\
\\sy manngarnarrh\
\\uv Kdj= an-barnadja, E= man-ngarnarrngh, Djnj= an-barlarra\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngukdjirrworlk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge plant.sp.\
\\re Owenia vernicosa\
\\re Owenia reticulata\
\\de kind of small to medium sized tree (4-12m)\
\\sc Owenia vernicosa, Owenia reticulata\
\\uv W\
\\sy man-barlarra\
\\ur Djnj= an-barlarra, Kdj= an-barnadja, E= man-ngarnarrngh, I= man-ngarnarrh, W synonym= ngukdjirrworlk\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 03/Dec/2013\
\
\\lx ngukdjorrhborrbborrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dripping of burning flesh\
\\xv Birri-bekkang kah-borrbborrbme ngukdjorrhmimborrbborrbborrborr\
kam-djorrhborrbborrmeng man-kang bonj la birri-djandjan-mey birri-djalkdjalk-mey\
wanjh birri-kinjeng nunganwali. Bonj.\
\\xe They heard dripping, his flesh burning and dripping down, finally he fell and they pulled all the spears\
out and fetched tinder and burnt him in turn. The end.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Ngukkabbu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Billabong and creek in fv:Barrbin clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Ngukkani\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de small creek in fv:Marrirn clan estate\
\\xv Ngukkani bolk-marrin, milirl ka-rri.\
\\xe Ngukkani is a place in Marrirn country, and there is fv:Trophis_scandens vine growing there.\
\
\\lx nguk-malakano\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de long intestine\
\\nt check spelling (malakkano?)\
\
\\lx ngukmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de remove the guts of an animal before cooking.\
\
\\lx ngukmanj\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\lit fv:nguk 'shit' fv:manj 'taste'\
\\de cheesefruit tree with edible medicinal fruit\
\\sc Morinda citrifolia\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I\
\\uv W, I= manngukmanj, Djnj, Kdj, an-ngukmanj\
\\sd plant\
\\p kur, ra-kur a\'ee bwa.jpg\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx ngukno\
\\va kun-nguk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 1\
\\de intestines\
\\sn 2\
\\de all internal organs, guts.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Used to describe fv:delek, white ochre which is considered to be the faeces of Ngalyod the rainbow\
serpent.\
\\xv Nanih nguk-mak ngalkeng.\
\\xe This is good white ochre he has found.\
\\sn 4\
\\de sour part of wild honey which is not eaten.\
\\xv Ngukno na-bahbang kan-djenbun.\
\\xe The sour part of the honey hive is strong tasting; it can burn our tongue.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nguknudmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re guts go bad, smelly farts\
\\de Develop digestive problems that result in foul smelling flatulence, usually from eating bad food.\
\\xv Yikordbanj, kare yinguknudminj.\
\\xe You smell like shit, maybe your guts are rotten.\
\\dt 30/Jan/2015\
\
\\lx ngulam\
\\ps temp. adv.\
\\re tomorrow\
\\de Tomorrow.\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W= malayi\
\\ng Note Burarra language fv:ngulambarr \'91tomorrow\'92.\
\\dt 30/Jan/2015\
\
\\lx ngulanyak\
\\ps temp. adv.\
\\re tomorrow\
\\de Tomorrow.\
\\uv E\
\\ur W= malayi\
\\sy malayi, ngulam (I)\
\\dt 30/Jan/2015\
\
\\lx ngulken\
\\ps adv.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Spending enough time only to achieve a planned objective.\
\\xv Kabarri-djalyo minjbi ngulken, kabarri-ngulkenyo bu an-kung kabarri-yawan.\
\\xe They just camp for a while to see what what turns up; they camp for a few days to look around for honey.\
\\sn 2\
\\re camp overnight or for few days\
\\de Camping overnight or for a few nights in order to gather or hunt a particular resource.\
\\xv Birri-buyika bininj birri-rey birri-nguni djenj namekke ngulken.\
\\xe Other people would go and eat fish there, camping for a day or two.\
\\dt 30/Jan/2015\
\
\\lx nguludjumuk\
\\lc man-nguludjumuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de yellow dye plant\
\\sc Coelospermum reticulatum\
\\ee the roots are dug up, the outer fibre is scraped off and boiled to produce a yellow dye.\
\
\\lx Nguluminj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de An extinct fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan centred on tributaries of Tin Camp Creek west south-west of Mamardawerre outstation.\
\\xv Konda mak karrikad Djalarrmanjbuk nani kun-kare ngarri-bom, konda ngamed Makorlngarre Bolknguluminj, Kudjamarndi area, kumekke kah-ni.\
\\xe Here also in the west at Djalarrmanjbuk we used to kill them a long time ago (Oenpelli pythons) and here at whatsit, in the Makorl\
estate of the Nguluminj clan and the Kudjumarndi estate area, that's where they are.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx ngulurr\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge coals\
\\re coals of fire\
\\de red hot coals\
\\sn 2\
\\va ngulurrno\
\\ge underground.fire\
\\re fire burning underground\
\\de fire that burns underground in masses of leaf litter\
\\sn 3\
\\ge leaf.litter\
\\re leaf litter along water courses\
\\de dried leaf litter that accumulates along the margins of water courses or floating on water\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ngumberr\
\\lc kun-ngumberr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de wrist\
\\xv Yi-ngumberr-dukkarren.\
\\xe Tie it around your wrist.\
\
\\lx ngumburlnga\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de Puffer Fish\
\\ee Karri-danjbun ka-bo-rrolkan.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de eat\
\\xv Minj nga-nguyi.\
\\xe I didn't eat it.\
\\sn 2\
\\de an idiom meaning to have sex with\
\\sn 3\
\\de an idiom meaning to be consumed by the rainbow serpent\
\\xv Ngun-nguneng mayh?\
\\xe Has the serpent consumed you?\
\\pdn kk = -yakwan\
\
\\lx ngundikoydoy\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my cross sex sibling, your fv:kakkak, you are my fv:kakkak.\
\\cn ngal-mulebe.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngundjekkan\
\\va -ngundjikkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de imitate, copy, mimic\
\
\\lx ngune-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 2nd person dual (2 unit augmented) intransitive pronominal prefix.\
\\xv Ngune-wurlebme?\
\\xe Are you two going swimming?\
\\sn 2\
\\de 2nd person dual subject and 3rd person singular object pronominal prefix i.e. you two acting on he/she/it.\
prefix.\
\\xv Ngune-mang?\
\\xe Are you 2 going to get it?\
\\gi Note that pronominal verb prefixes can also attach to adjectives giving a predicate sense.\
\\xv Ngune-warre.\
\\xe You are both no good.\
\\uv W, I, Djnj\
\\ur E= nguni-\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx nguni-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\de Kune equivalent of fv:ngune-\
\\cf see ngune-\
\
\\lx ngurdke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re terminate, silence\
\\de Silence something, terminate.\
\\xv Benbom bendjalngurdkeng bonj.\
\\xe It killed them, silenced them, finished!\
\\xv Mahni manbu mankarre skulken kamarnbuyindan ba bu yimunkewe kare skul. Bu ngudda minj yire kore ngurriwokdi dja mak minj yikadjung mankarre wanjh kabirringurdke nawu kunwardde wurdurdken.\
\\xe The plan will include actions that you and your child\'92s school can take to help make sure your child goes to school every day. If you don\'92t go to this conference or follow the actions in your school attendance plan, your income support payments may be stopped.\
\\dt 29/Jan/2016\
\
\\lx ngurdme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become silent\
\\xv Yingurdmen!\
\\xe Shut up!\
\\xv Kodjngurdmeng.\
\\xe He was silent in thought.\
\\xv Nga-marneyimeng ningihni kodjngurdmeng, njale bengkahbengkang, njale\
bengkahbengkang?\
\\xe I told her and she just sat there silently, what was she thinking, what was she thinking? (Words of a\
fv:wurrurrumi song).\
\\pdn kk = burnbonghme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngurdulme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de thunder\
\\xv Ka-ngurdulme.\
\\xe There is thunder.\
\
\\lx ngurdungurd\
\\ps n.\
\\re grasshopper\
\\de Green grasshopper sp.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 30/May/2014\
\
\\lx Ngurdyawok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de name of mythological character of Kodjok subsection, in-law of fv:Nawalabik from well known Mayali\
myth.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngurl-durrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de (of dogs), eat the heart/ other organs of an animal, snatch the heart out.\
\\sn 2\
\\de An idiom meaning to kidnap with intent to seduce\
\\sy ngurl-kardme\
\
\\lx ngurl-kardmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de abduct with romantic intent\
\\sy ngurl-durrkme.\
\
\\lx ngurlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de appear in darkness, appear as a dark shape\
\\xv Nganabbarru kukak kam-ngurlmeng.\
\\xe A buffalo came in the darkness last night.\
\\xv Kam-ngurlme man-djewk.\
\\xe The storm is coming (as a dark form).\
\
\\lx ngurlno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de heart\
\
\\lx ngurlubburr\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge crevice\
\\re hollow in rock, crevice\
\\de a hollow or crevice inside or inbetween rocks where animals frequently take shelter\
\\xv kore midjanjdjanj ngani; kun-ngurlubburr kani\
\\xe I sit in the fi:Acacia_gonocarpa grove; He [a black wallaroo] sits in the crevice of the rock.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx ngurlurr\
\\ps n.\
\\re vegetation fuel\
\\de Dried vegetation swept into masses along creek banks. When ignited during bush fires these masses of vegetation can burn for many days. Sometimes the fires burn underground and walking along the creek bank after fire can be dangerous.\
\\xv Ngurlurr ga-rung mungui.\
\\xe Bunches of floodwater leaves burn for a long time.\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 30/May/2014\
\
\\lx ngurumburnga\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de possibly mud skipper, sometimes wrongly used by children to describe tadpoles.\
\
\\lx ngurrewoneng\
\\ps ob.pron./poss.pron.\
\\de you 2, yours (you 2)\
\
\\lx ngurri-\
\\ps pronominal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de 2nd person plural (2 augmented) intransitive pronominal prefix.\
\\xv Ngurri-yo kondanj.\
\\xe You sleep here.\
\\sn 2\
\\de 2nd person plural subject, 3rd person singular object (2 augmented/3 minimal) pronominal prefix.\
\\xv Ngurri-dadjke kun-rak.\
\\xe You are all cutting firewod.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Non-verbal pronominal characteristic prefix.\
\\xv ngurri-bengwarr.\
\\xe You are all stupid.\
\
\\lx Ngurrinj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Ngurrkdu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re Spring Peak\
\\de place name for an outstation in Kakadu National Park about 10km south-west of Cooinda, also known in English as Spring Peak\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 23/Mar/2011\
\
\\lx ngurrkeno\
\\ps n.\
\\de Honey comb of native bee hives.\
\\xv Man-kung ngurrkeno, dabuno karri-ngun, ngukno karri-we.\
\\xe We eat the honeycomb and the pollen sacs but we throw away the eggs/brood of the hive.\
\\sd bees&honey\
\\dt 06/May/2015\
\
\\lx ngurrngdeng\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de avoid someone, ignore them, not speak to someone\
\\xv Ka-benngurrngdeng.\
\\xe He's not talking to them (hates them).\
\\uv E\
\\uv I=yirrhmiwon\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngurrum\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Coastal She-Oak\
\\sc Casuarina equisetifolia\
\\bw probably loaned from fv:Kunbarlang language.\
\\ee Kun-kurra ka-buhme karri-bekkan ka-wirdme.\
\\xe When the wind blows we can hear it whistling.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx ngurrurdu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge emu\
\\re emu\
\\re fi:Dromaius_novaehollandiae\
\\de Emu\
\\sc Dromaius novaehollandiae\
\\uv E= wurrbbarn, W=kurdukadji, Kdj= alwandjuk\
\\pdn kk = kurduyulu\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ngurrurdu karrebalbal\
\\ps n.\
\\ge western.brown\
\\re western brown snake (E)\
\\re fi:Pseudonaja_nuchalis\
\\de western brown snake\
\\xv Kurdkurdngadjedje na-bang namekke ka-kodjngurlme dja werrkkimuk.\
\\xe The western brown snake has a dark head and has big scales.\
\\nt information provided by Belinj Patsy ngal-Barabba\
\\sc Pseudonaja nuchalis\
\\uv W, Djnj\
\\ur E= kurdkurdngadjedje\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 07/Apr/2011\
\
\\lx ngurrurn\
\\ps n.\
\\re river she-oak\
\\de River she-oak.\
\\sc Casuarina cunninghamiana\
\\sc Casuarina quisetifolia\
\\uv E\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 30/May/2014\
\
\\lx nguy\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de flower, any flower\
\\cf ka-nguybun (v.i.)\
\\ce to bloom\
\\cf ka-nguybanj\
\\ce to smell (of flowers)\
\
\\lx nguya\
\\lc kun-nguya\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de clan group\
\\uv W= kun-mokkurrkurr\
\\xv Ngudda njale yi-karrme kun-nguya?\
\\xe What clan do you belong to?\
\\pde Gagadju= nguyu\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx nguybun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be in flower\
\\xv Man-lerrlerr ka-nguybun wanjh ngurrurdu kah-ngun.\
\\xe The Bossiaea bossiaeoides flowers and then the emus come and eat them.\
\
\\lx nguydangen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stand (of plants) in flower. Mostly used to refer to spear grass.\
\
\\lx nguy-di\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de have flowers\
\
\\lx nguykarlkid\
\\lc man-nguykarlkid\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de nectar of flowers\
\
\\lx nguyuk\
\\lc kun-nguyuk\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de knee\
\\pde kun-bard\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx nguyuk-murridjme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de stems break (of grass)\
\\xv Man-bende ka-nguyuk-murridjme.\
\\pde Man-bedje ka-bardbakme.\
\\pde bard-bakme.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Ng\'9cn\'9cng\'9cn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Waridjngu clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx njaknjakme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de chatter incessantly\
\
\\lx njanjma\
\\ps n.\
\\ge quoll\
\\re quoll\
\\de Northern quoll.\
\\sc Dasyurus hallucatus\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur I, W= djabbo\
\\sd mammal\
\
\\lx Njanjma Borrkkeng\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx man-njalbbuwa\
\\ps n.\
\\re Leichhardt tree\
\\de Leichhardt tree.\
\\uv E = man-wurrbula, Kdj= an-kunkun, an-marrewahwah, W= man-marrewahwa\
\\sc Nauclea orientalis\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx njale\
\\ps interrog.\
\\de what\
\\xv Nawu njale?\
\\xe What's up? What's that you're talking about?\
\
\\lx njalehnjale\
\\ps n.\
\\re various things\
\\re whatever\
\\re this and that\
\\de Various things, whatever, this and that, stuff.\
\\dt 11/Nov/2016\
\
\\lx njalkkan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de tree orchid\
\\sc Cymbidium canaliculatum\
\
\\lx njam\
\\lc kun-njam\
\\pr kun-\
\\va njamno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\sd body part\
\\ge guts\
\\de intestines\
\\re intestines\
\\cf njamkimuk\
\\sn 2\
\\de section of a honey hive where the bees lay eggs\
\\ee Note that the eggs in a bee hive are not called 'eggs' in Bininj Kunwok but rather 'guts/intestines'. The\
balls of yellow pollen in the honey hive however are referred to as fv:dabuno, fv:danbuk 'eggs'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx njam\
\\lc man-njam\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de guts, offal\
\\pde ngukno\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx njamdjorrhdjorrh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de agile wallaby\
\\sc Macropus agilis\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kornobolo, merlbbe, warradjangkal\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx njam-djurrudjurruhmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de put on weight, 'get big belly'.\
\
\\lx njamed\
\\ps interj.\
\\de thing, whatchamacallit (when you can't remember the name)\
\\va na-ngamed (what's his name)\
\\xv ngal-njamed\
\\xe What's her name.\
\
\\lx njamedme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de do 'whatsit' (when you can't remember the verb).\
\\xv Kad ka-njamedme bu ka-ye ka-rrong, ka-rrong la ka-kinje.\
\\xe If he plays cards he should 'whatsit', strike it (the talisman) and then burn it.\
\
\\lx njamhnjamhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de chew\
\\xv Nganabbarru ka-njamhnjamhme ka-nunjwirlme.\
\\xe The buffalo chews (its cud) and dribbles saliva.\
\
\\lx njamlurruk\
\\va na-njamlurruk (for Black Wallaroo)\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\sn 1\
\\de male wallaroo or euro\
\\sc Macropus robustus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde karlkberd\
\\sn 2\
\\de male black rock wallaroo\
\\sc Macropus bernadus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde nadjinem\
\\xv Ku-bangam ka-morndi njamlurruk.\
\\pde Ku-wardde ka-yo nadjinem.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx njamno\
\\ps n.\
\\de red ochre\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde yamidj\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx njangme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be numerous, plentiful\
\\xv Kah-njangme djenj.\
\\xe There's plenty of fish.\
\
\\lx njarlbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de particular arm and ankle swinging style of dancing, usually performed by women\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde njarlme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx njarlkan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de a kind of orchid\
\
\\lx njarlme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de particular arm and ankle swinging style of dancing, usually (but not always) performed by women\
\\xv Yi-ray yi-marneyimen kam-re ka-njarlme\
\\xe Go and tell her to come here and dance. (words to a fv:wurrurrumi song)\
\\pdn kk = njarlbonghme\
\
\\lx njebke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de plop, squirt or dollop a viscous or wet substance onto a surface\
\\xv Bi-keb-njebkeng.\
\\xe He plopped it onto his face.\
\
\\lx njedjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de hop (certain macropod species specific only), pertains to male wallaroo (Macropus robustus) fv:karlkberd only.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx njeknjek\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge forbidden\
\\re forbidden, restricted (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de sacred, restricted, secret, set apart.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djamun\
\\xv Yun yi-yakwan na-njeknjek.\
\\pde Yun yi-ngun na-djamun.\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= djenguk\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx njilhme\
\\ps formative in fv:njilinjilhme.\
\
\\lx njilinjbirrk\
\\va man-njirrinjbilk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge shrub.sp.\
\\re shrub sp.\
\\re fi:Hibbertia_oblongata\
\\de Shrub sp. FLowers are important for honey bees.\
\\sc Hibbertia oblongata\
\\ee Good firestick\
\\sd plants\
\\dt 16/Feb/2014\
\
\\lx njilinjilhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge light.rain\
\\re light rain\
\\re raining lightly\
\\de Light rain, sprinkle of light rain.\
\
\\lx njilme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de feel cooled eg. by a breeze or cool shade, particularly just before a storm\
\
\\lx njilng\
\\lc kun-njilng\
\\ps n.\
\\de feelings\
\\xv Nga-njilngwarreminj\
\\xe I feel sad.\
\
\\lx njirreyhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re sound of frying or buzzing\
\\sn 1\
\\de Sound of food frying in oil/fat.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Buzzing sounds such as the electronic buzzing of audio equipment.\
\\dt 28/Dec/2015\
\
\\lx njirrhmiwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de avoid someone, ignore them, not speak to someone because of hatred.\
\\xv Ka-ben-njirrhmiwon.\
\\xe He's not talking to them (hates them).\
\\uv E=ngurrngdeng\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx njirrke\
\\lc kun-njirrke\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de charcoal 2. black paint made from charcoal\
\
\\lx njiwkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fat or oil appearing during the cooking of meat.\
\
\\lx njiwnjiwhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cook food so that oil/fat from the meat appears\
\
\\lx njiwnjiwme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge heavy.rain\
\\re rain falling heavily\
\\de Wet season heavy rain that falls non-stop for a long period of time.\
\\xv Minj karri-bebme ka-djalnjiwnjiwme.\
\\xe We can't go outside, it's raining very heavily.\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx njohmi\
\\lc man-njohmi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Stone country pandanus\
\\sc Pandanus basedowii\
\\uv E = man-ngokngo (the 'k' in this Kune word is a voiceless velar fricative?).\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx njok\
\\ps ideophone\
\\ge woof!\
\\re woof!\
\\de Woof! The bark of dogs.\
\
\\lx njokkorl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de ceremony name from Malnjangarnak area, similar to Kunabibi.\
\
\\lx njokme\
\\ps v.i., v.t.\
\\ge bark\
\\re bark (of dogs)\
\\de Barking of dogs.\
\\xv Na-kudji kodjeyoy, bekkang duruk njokmeng.\
\\xe A man slept and heard a dog barking.\
\\xv Kan-njokme djurn, ngal-mak.\
\\xe The Black-headed Python barks at us, it's non-venomous (lit:'good').\
\
\\lx njolhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge put.in.mouth\
\\re put food in mouth\
\\de Put food into the mouth.\
\
\\lx njolobonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge sing\
\\re sing (kun-kurrng register)\
\\de Sing\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde wayini\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx njonwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re mash up, make into mash\
\\de Make into a mash, ground to a pulp.\
\\xv Kabirrihdong, kabirrinjonwon wanjh kabirrikurrme kore "pannikin"\
\\xe They pound it, mash it up and they put it into a pot.\
\\dt 06/Mar/2016\
\
\\lx njonj\
\\lc an-njonj\
\\ps soft plant material which has been pounded eg. Acacia bark used for soaking up honey.\
\\xv Ngarri-yerrkke ngarri-djohlahlarlmang arrimarnbun an-njonj an-kung anih arri-baru:ng.\
\\xe We strip off [the bark] and spread out the strands to make a soft material for soaking up honey.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx njonj njonj\
\\ps interj.\
\\de 'how cute', said to young babies\
\
\\lx njudj\
\\ps ideoph.\
\\ge blow.nose\
\\re sound of blowing snot out of nose\
\\de Sound of blowing mucus out of the nose. Often said to children.\
\\xv Ma, njudj!\
\\xe OK, blow [the snot out of your nose].\
\\dt 18/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx njudjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge blow.snot\
\\re blow out mucus from nose\
\\de Blow mucus out of the nose, expel mucus.\
\\xv Yi-njudjmen! Ma njudj!\
\\xe Blow your nose! Go on 'blow'.\
\
\\lx njukme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de smoke\
\\sy wungme\
\
\\lx njunghke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de provoke revenge\
\\xv Bi-njunghkeng wanjh bi-bom.\
\\xe He provoked him to seek revenge and he so he struck him.\
\
\\lx njunghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de desire??\
\\xv Yawkyawk ngundi-marne-njunghme\
\\xe Those girls want you???\
\\nt check.\
\
\\lx Njumbu\uc0\u8232 \\va Yumbu\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Place name in the Birrirddak Creek region.\uc0\u8232 \\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx njuridj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rufous.whistler\
\\re rufous whistler\
\\re fi:Pachycephala_rufiventris\
\\de Rufous whistler.\
\\sc Pachycephala rufiventris\
\\xv Nakorrkko bene-nang njuridj bininj-ni bene-bimbom wanjh burralkmeng.\
\\xe The fv:Nakorrkko ancestors saw the Rufous Whistler bird when he was in the form of a man, painted him up and he performed ceremonial ritual.\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx odjbel\
\\ps n.\
\\de hospital\
\\bw English loan\
\
\\lx rlangka-rlangka\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de mother-of-pearl shells, highly sacred objects used in ceremony and obtained often as a trade item.\
\\xv Kabirri-djuhke rlangka-rlangka kabirri-wabun wanjh nungan ka-bo-bebme djawaway.\
\\xe They immerse the sacred mother-of-pearl shell into water they sing an incantation and then the heavy\
rain known as fv:djawaway will appear.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx rlobme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de run (of people, animals or vehicles)\
\
\\lx rak\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de fire\
\\sn 2\
\\de firewood\
\\ng incorporable\
\\cf ka-rakmang\
\\ce she is getting fire\
\\pdn kk = kun-mimal\
\\uv W= kun-rerrng, MM= kunak\
\\ee Rem.= ngurah\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rakalk\
\\ps n.\
\\de sorcerer, murderer\
\\cf ka-rakalkre\
\\ce he travels around doing sorcery\
\
\\lx rakalkre\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go around as a sorcerer in order to murder or cause harm to someone.\
\
\\lx rakbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de run\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx rakburrinj\
\\ps v.i. reflex.\
\\de run (when referring to self)\
\\xv Nga-rakburrinj.\
\\xe I ran.\
\\uv E.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rakel\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\va rakelno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge non-woody plant\
\\re shrub, plant (non-woody), vegetation\
\\de generic term for small plants, low vegetation cover or non-woody plants and new growth of woody plants.\
\\ng incorporable\
\\xv Man-dulkkimuk ka-mankan wanjh man-buyika ka-bebme rakelno.\
\\xe When a big tree falls down, the new shoots will  appear.\
\\xv Kunak ka-rung wanjh man-rakel ka-welengbebme.\
\\xe Fire burns (the country) and new growth will eventually come up.\
\\xv Ya. [draws a cheeky yam in a notebook) kuneh nga-yime. Kuneh ka-yime man-yawok wanjh kunekke ka-yime njamed ka-rakeldi, yoh rakelno, ka-rakel-di ya. Kune ka-yime kaluk worrno ngalengman.\
\\xe Yeah, this is how I do it [draw the yam]. It's like this, that cheeky yam, here are the different parts of the plant, the leaves and fine roots.\
It's like this and here are the leaves here.\
\\ee This term is generic covering small shrubs, new growth of woody plants, but does not include those plants included in the category of\
fv:kun-dulk 'trees' except for the new shoots of trees low on the ground. New contexts include reference to domestic potted plants.\
\\sd plant\
\\so Victor Garlngarr\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx rakkala\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\lc man-rakkala\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de paperbark/Melaleuca species, grows in sandstone habitats\
\\dt 09/May/2006\
\
\\lx rakkowarre\
\\ps adj\
\\lit fire-dyad-bad\
\\de Wrong way marriage, usually involving marrying a partner from the incorrect subsection. Although it may be tolerated, it is usually subject to disapproval, especially in the period immediately after the couple start living together. The term has a dual pronominal prefix \'91they/you/we two\'92. The term literally means \'92the two at the wrong fire\'92.\
\\xv Bene-rakkowarre.\
\\xe Those two [who are] in a wrong way marriage.\
\\xv Ngune-rakkowarre.\
\\xe You two are in a wrong way marriage.\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 18/Sep/2015\
\
\\lx rakmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de get fire wood\
\\uv W= rerrngmang\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rakmo\
\\lc kun-rakmo\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de hip\
\
\\lx rakul\
\\sd bird\
\\de partridge pigeon\
\\xv Korroko ngarri-yimi oh rakul somewhere ka-re karri-nan ka-re ka-wakewake. Ngurrurdu but rakul ngah-djalyimihyimi.\
\\xe Long ago we used to say there's a partridge pigeon somewhere there wandering around. It was actually an emu but we would refer to it as 'partridge pigeon'.\
\\sc Geophaps smithii\
\\ee This pigeon lives on the ground. It has a featherless patch of red skin around each eye.\
\\uv I\
\\ur E= dabbarr\
\\ee REM = djiribbu\
\\en duwa\
\\dt 12/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx Rakul Kabongun\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Bolkngok estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx ramberambe\
\\ps n.\
\\re brown tree snake\
\\de Brown tree snake (although note this snake is not brown but brown and white striped).\
\\sc Boiga irregularis\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 01/Jun/2014\
\\dt 09/May/2006\
\
\\lx rangem\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge male\
\\de male\
\\sn 2\
\\de brother of a female referent\
\\ng see fv:na-rangem\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Rangkabba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate on Tomkinson River flood plain and site of\
dreaming/sacred site for fv:dedded rainbow lorikeet fi:Trichoglossus_haemotodus.\
\\dt 09/May/2006\
\
\\lx rarrbu\
\\ps n.\
\\de reddish fine-grained quartzite used for making stone tools\
\\xv Rarrbu birri-yirrkbom mayh korroko birri-karrmeninj man-kole njamed yiman barrawu.\
\\xe A long time ago they used to cut up animals with quartzite tools and they had spears like shovel nose\
spears (ie. which they used to kill the animals).\
\\ee Yolngu fv:larr 'stone flakes' (only obtainanble from Ngilipitji quarry in N.E. Arnhem\
Land).\
\\dt 09/May/2006\
\
\\lx Rarrinji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Lambirra clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rarrk\
\\ps n.\
\\de cross hatching style of painting on bark or body decoration for Mardayin ceremony.\
\
\\lx rarrkwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de paint cross hatching designs or 'rarrk'\
\\xv Bindi-rarrkweng walk kenh.\
\\xe They painted cross-hatching designs on the initiants.\
\\pdn kk = rarrkwarlhke.\
\
\\lx rawon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de combine, make two, put together, make an addition.\
\\uv W=-dirawon\
\\ng see fv:karrirawon, fv:wernrawon\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx raworren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de make a group of many\
\\xv Karri-raworren karri-wern karri-re.\
\\xe Lets make ourselves a big group and lots of us go.\
\
\\lx rayek\
\\ps adj.\
\\sn 1\
\\de solid\
\\xv Bonj, kamak, ka-bolh-rayek, yi-djalay.\
\\xe It's OK just keep driving, the ground is hard.\
\\sn 2\
\\de difficult\
\\cf rayekwon\
\\ce to harden, tighten\
\\cf rayekmen\
\\ce become hard.\
\\cf dang-rayek\
\\ce strict, tough negotiator.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx rayek\
\\lc kun-rayek\
\\ps n.\
\\de description of language dialects as 'hard'. The eastern dialects of Mayali are described by westerners as\
fv:kun-rayek. The Kuninjku describe the Kune dialect as fv:kun-rayek when comparing it to their own\
but call their own dialect fv:kun-rayek when comparing it to that spoken for example at Kunbarlanja.\
\\xv Kun-kerlk kabirri-yime 'nga-burrbun' la ngad kun-rayek ngarri-yime 'nga-bengkan'.\
\\xe The soft dialect speakers say 'nga-burrbun' but we hard dialect speakers use the word 'nga-bengkan'.\
\\uv E= na-rayek\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rayekki\
\\ps adv.\
\\de one place, without moving around, stationary\
\\xv Wurdurd yuwn ngurri-wohre ngurri-djalnin rayekki.\
\\xe Children don't move around everywhere. Just sit in the one place.\
\
\\lx rayekmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become hard, solid or tight, solidify\
\
\\lx rayekwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de tighten or strengthen something\
\
\\lx re\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go, travel\
\\ng irregular\
\\pdn kk = dokan\
\\xv Karri-re nga-marrwe dowen.\
\\xe Let's go, I'm hungry.\
\\xv Birriwam.\
\\xe They're gone.\
\\xv Yimarnek kamrayi la kurrinj.\
\\xe He was supposed to come, maybe he was lying.\
\\xv Yiray, kan-bawo.\
\\xe Go away and leave me alone.\
\\xv Ngurrimray rowk.\
\\xe Everybody come here.\
\\uv E= rakbun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx red\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de home, place, country, 'hearth', living area\
\
\\lx reddi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de campsite located, have a place of dwelling\
\\xv Makka mak mimih kumekke ka-reddi. Manih ka-warddedjabdi.\
\\xe Mimih also have a camp in that place. There where those boulders are protruding.\
\
\\lx reddorrengh\
\\ps adv.\
\\de with all the possessions needed to shift camp\
\\xv Red-dorrengh yim-wam?\
\\xe Did you come with all your things (ie. have you come to camp)?\
\
\\lx redweleng\
\\pr na-, (ng)al-, birri- etc.\
\\ps n.\
\\ge traditional.owner\
\\re traditional owner of land\
\\de The traditional owner or person responsible for a place or tract of land. \
\
\\lx Rembarrnga\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge Rembarrnga\
\\re language name\
\\de language name, spoken to the east and south-east of Bininj Kunwok territory\
\\xv Ngalkka djal Rembarrnga wurrbbarn.\
\\xe She [the emu] is called fv:wurrbbarn in Rembarrnga language.\
\\ee Almost all Rembarrnga speakers can speak a dialect of, or understand Bininj Kunwok. \
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\so Peter Biliss\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx remek\
\\lc kun-remek\
\\va remekno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de temple\
\
\\lx rendeno\
\\va rendenowurd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de Small tributary of river or creek, gulley, wash out on dirt road. fv:Rendeno is smaller than fv:man-kabo.\
\\xv Konda man-kabo ka-re nani rendeno ka-barlungme.\
\\xe This creek goes along here and this tributary turns off here.\
\\xv Nani yinan man-wanjdjad kamre, nani konda Muwalmi. Rendenowurd, Mayali ngarduk, rendenowurd, Muwalmi kun-red.\
\\xe Look at this creek tributary coming, here at Muwalmi (a place name). In my Mayali language [I call a small tributary] fv:rendenowurd, at this place Muwalmi.\
\\uv E= rendenowurd\
\
\\lx rerre\
\\ps loc/temp. adv.\
\\va yerre, rerrih\
\\sn 1\
\\ge behind\
\\re behind\
\\de behind\
\\xv A: Kan-bukkan ayeka, yi-babang! B: Nahni boken yerre.\
\\xe A: Show me where it hurts! B: These two (teeth) behind.\
\\xv Rerre kam-lobme.\
\\xe It's coming behind (a truck).\
\\xv Ngudda yi-rrokme, ngayi rerre ngam-re.\
\\xe You go first and I'll come behind.\
\\xv Nungka werrk ba-wardebidbom, aye yerre a-welengbidbom.\
\\xe He climbed up the rock first and I climbed up after/behind. \
\\xv A: Minj kurrungburldjdjarn ngurri-wurlhke ka-welengkadjung ka-buleyo yuhyungki ka-yingkihbuleyo kumekke beh\
ka-djaldowen ka-re. B: Wanjh yerrebeh arri-bulemunkewe.\
\\xe You don't light bushfires in the middle of the hot build-up season but if a fire does go through it will meet the firebreaks which are\
already in place and there it will die down. B: So what we are doing is creating firebreaks behind it (the anbinik forest). [that is 'behind'\
means upwind from the anbinik forest]\
\\ng The case marker fv:-beh is added when behind is used as a two place predicate i.e. 'behind' with respect to something else. In the above\
example, it is in relation to the anbinik forest.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge after\
\\re after\
\\re later\
\\re afterwards\
\\de after or later, afterwards\
\\xv Aleng ba-rroweng, ngaye nga-djordminj yerre.\
\\xe She died and I grew up later (i.e. she died before I grew up).\
\\xv Wanjh yerrekah kurrmeng manyaw. \
\\xe Then afterwards, he fitted the mouth (of the fishtrap).\
\\sn 3\
\\de as before, as we know, as discussed, as established before (in combination with various other words as illustrated)\
\\xv kun-kare rerre\
\\xe as before\
\\xv Man-kare rerre yi-kadjung.\
\\xe Follow the same one (road) as before.\
\\xv Njale ngurri-yolyolme ngurri-djekme? Konda rerre ngad kun-berr ngarri-djekme.\
\\xe What are you talking and laughing about. We're just having fun.\
\\xv Yiman birri-kodjyimeng 'nawern rerre bininj' bad nungka na-djalkudjihkudji ngudjbebmeng. \
\\xe So they were thinking that there would be lots of people there (from what he had led them to believe), but he turned up there and there\
was nobody.\
\\dt 26/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx rerrererre\
\\sn 1\
\\ge long_after\
\\re long after\
\\re later\
\\de long after, some time afterwards\
\\de\
\\de\
\\sn 2\
\\ge next_time\
\\re next time\
\\de next time\
\\de next time\
\\dt 26/Mar/2007\
\
\
\\lx rerrngkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de take fire wood\
\\uv KW\
\
\\lx rerrngmang\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fetch firewood\
\\uv E, W\
\\uv I= rakmang\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx reybun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de to hit or kill 'because of or connected to something'\
\\ng 'comitative + bun'\
\\xv Nga-reybun nganabbarru yaw.\
\\xe I'll kill the young buffalo (from the mother one).\
\\xv Nga-reybun na-bininjdoy ngan-kaybom daluk.\
\\xe I'll go and hit that bloke [father-in-law] (because of his daughter), he won't let me have here.\
\\xv Kun-bang ngan-kaybom nga-reybun.\
\\xe He wouldn't give me any grog, I'll hit him for that.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Beat someone when playing cards.\
\
\\lx rid\
\\lc kun-rid\
\\ps n.\
\\de trouble, argument\
\
\\lx riddolkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de the appearance of trouble\
\
\\lx riddung\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de chastise, speak harshly, accuse, swear\
\
\\lx ridkire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de travelling to seek revenge or trouble\
\\xv No illustrative sentence yet.\
\\nt check\
\
\\lx ridngalke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make trouble, start a fight\
\\xv Wanjh na-kudji ridngalkeng bin-duy bedberre.\
\\xe Then one man started trouble and swore at them.\
\
\\lx rin\
\\lc na-rin\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\cf see fv:na-rin\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx rinjku\
\\lc na-/ngal-rinjku\
\\ps n.\
\\de a man/woman belonging to western Kunwinjku/Mayali language group.\
\\xv Birri-rinjku.\
\\xe They are western Mayali language people.\
\
\\lx riyak\
\\lc manriyak\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Xanthostemon paradoxus\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =man-bulu.\
\\ee Ngurrurdu man-me nuye ka-ngun.\
\\xe Emus eat it.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rodjbe\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge red ochre\
\\re ochre red\
\\de red ochre\
\\ee Red ochre names vary amongst the different dialects. For some groups a particular kind of red ochre is more easily accessible and the name for this kind of ochre then becomes the generic term for red ochres. For example in Kundedjnjenghmi the generic term for red ochre is fv:kun-rodjbe and in Kune the equivalent is marnarr, but in Kundedjnjenghmi marnarr is used to refer to that type of ochre which is dark red with a mineral sparkle in it when applied to the skin or other surfaces.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\sd geographic\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, W\
\\ur I= yamidj, E= manarr\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx rohrok\
\\ps adj.\
\\agr paradigm\
\\de same\
\\xv kabene-keb-rohrok\
\\xe Those two have the same face.\
\
\\lx rohrokme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\re try out\
\\re attempt\
\\re have a go\
\\de Try something out, attempt, have a go at something, test something.\
\\sn 2\
\\re investigate\
\\de Investigate something in order to try and understand something.\
\\xv The scientists check to make sure there is not too much radiation from the Ranger mine. \
\\xe Nawu scientist kabirri-rohrokme ba bu kabirri-nan manbu man-wern radiation ngarre minj ka-bebme kore kabirri-karungbeh.\
\\sn 3\
\\re compare\
\\de Compare.\
\\sn 4\
\\re estimate\
\\de Estimate.\
\\sn 5\
\\re group together\
\\de group together, form a group.\
\\xv Kan-rohrokmeng.\
\\xe He gathered us into a group.\
\\xv Yi-benmang wurdurd nga-benrohrokme kure Marrkolidjban.\
\\xe Go and get the children and I'll put them in a group at Marrkolidjban.\
\\xv Birri-bimbom djenj mankahmankang. Karrih-ngun nani namekke kah-bo-kadjung djenj. Kah-bimdi, kah-rohrokme.\
\\xe They painted images of fish and then they all appeared (lit: fell down). We would eat those fish which had followed the river up. When there's a painting of them, the fish increase (come in a big group).\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rokan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de wobble or shake\
\\cf bolk-rokahrokan\
\\ce earthquake\
\
\\lx Rol\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja patriclan on the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Ngalkirdimu, ka-barrarn ngaleng yi-nan kunu Bod Kadjangdi, yoh an-barrarn. Makka wanjh na-Burdohken. Kilhken na-rrurlmangkarr karrkad na-Rol karrkad koyek.\
\\xe At Ngalkirdimu there is a gorge/valley and you can see it [also] at Bod Kadjangdi, yeah a gorge. That there is Burdoh clan country. Downstream is Durlmangkarr clan country and then the Rol clan is above to the east.\
\\ee The Rol clan has fi:namarrkon 'lightning' as one of its major totemic or 'dreaming' emblems.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 09/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx rol\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge rice\
\\re rice\
\\re wild rice\
\\de wild rice\
\\sc Oryza rufipogon\
\\uv W, I, E= man-rol, Djnj, Kdj= an-rol\
\\ee In the late wet season the stalks are collected, dried and shaken to release the seeds which are then ground to make a flour used to make\
a loaf.\
\\sn 2\
\\re swamp panic grass\
\\re fi:Panicum_paludosum\
\\de Swamp panic grass, an aquatic perennial that gorws to 1.5m high with spongy stems floating on water.\
\\sc Panicum paludosum\
\\ee Also flowers and seeds in fv:kudjewk and fv:bangkerreng seasons. Preparation as for fi:Oryza_perennis.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx rolk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de maggot\
\\uv Kdj= yolk, yolh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Rolukayk\'9cn\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\uv E/D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rombebme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de search for\
\\pde yawan\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx romed\
\\lc kun-romed\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd body part\
\\de chest\
\\pde kun-berre.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx rong\
\\va anrong\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de stems of fv:Flagellaria indica which are cut off, the ends chewed to make a brush and then poked into honey\
hives with difficult access and the ends of the brushes are then sucked\
\\xv Rong arri-berlbakkeyi arri-bayi arri-karlkiddjolowkkeyi.\
\\xe We would break off stems (of fv:Flagellaria indica vine), chew the end and soak up the nectar.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx ronj\
\\lc kun-ronj\
\\ps n.\
\\de water\
\\uv W= kukku, E variant= kunnonj\
\\pdn kk = kun-djulkin\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx ronjwerren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\de Urinate.\
\\uv I\
\
\\lx rorrbo\
\\pr kun-, ku-\
\\va rorrbono\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clearing\
\\re clear area, open space\
\\re open space, clear area\
\\de An ecological zone characterised by a clearing, no trees and mostly grass or minimal or no vegetation at all. An open area in the bush or on an alluvial plain.\
\\xv Arri-bolkbirrhmiwarre arri-marnbuni yiman ka-yime konda ku-rorrbo. \
\\xe We would clear the area of vegetation, just like this cleared area here [in the outstation].\
\\sy bolkbaladj\
\\drw kudjambudjambudda rorrbono\
\\drm A clear area of bedrock [usually near a watercourse].\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 13/Nov/2013\
\
\\lx rorre\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\uv W\
\\de soil, dirt, ground\
\\lf synonym\
\\lv kun-kurlk\
\\le soil, dirt, ground\
\\uv W\
\\ur Djnj, Kdj, E, I= kun-kurlk\
\\dt 05/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx rowk\
\\ps adj.\
\\de everyone, everything, all\
\\xv kamak rowk\
\\xe everything is OK\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx royhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spy on someone, peek\
\\xv Yawkyawk benroyhmeng.\
\\xe He was spying on the girls.\
\
\\lx rudno\
\\ps n.\
\\de road used by vehicles\
\\bw English 'road'.\
\
\\lx ruhrukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de move pelvis in a sexual manner\
\\uv W= -noyhnoyhme\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de get up, move out of the way\
\\pde dolkkan.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx rumburre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de secret dreaming creation ancestor pertaining to fv:lorrkkon bone pole ceremony. Rumburre is the\
dreaming version of the flying ant/termite insect.\
\\xv Wok diwirrinj "karlangalangalangalangalang," yimeninj nawu wanahwam burralkmeng\
Rumburre nakka wanjh. Yi-bengkan, lorrkkon kah-burralkme.\
\\xe He would make this sound.He says "karlangalangalangalangalang" as he goes along with his own\
particular actions,that's what rumburre does. You know he performs in the lorrkkon ceremony.\
\\xv Ka-ngey-djarrkno rumburre, marlinjdji.\
\\xe There are two names for it, rumburre,and marlinjdji (the flying ant/termite).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx rumuh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de unidentified bird, possibly Torres Strait Pigeon or Banded Fruit Dove.\
\
\\lx rung\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de be hot, burn\
\\xv Nga-rrenge-rung\
\\xe My feet are hot.\
\\xv Ka-rung ka-rri.\
\\xe It's hot (refers to an object eg. mug of hot tea).\
\\sn 2\
\\de cook (v.i.)\
\\xv Man-me ka-rung.\
\\xe The food is cooking\
\\sn 3\
\\de ripening (of fruit)\
\\xv Man-wirdu ka-rung, karri-re karri-ngun.\
\\xe The fv:Carallia brachiata are ripening, lets go and eat them.\
\
\\lx rungarra\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de fresh water yabby species\
\\ee 'yiman ngalng'\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx rungkalno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge painting\
\\re painted outline\
\\sn 1\
\\de white ochre undercoat image, a term used in art (bark, rock or body painting) for the first outline of an\
image before embellishments are added such as dividing lines or cross hatching.\
\\xv Kanjdji buldjdjarn ka-yo bim, rungkalno ngarri-ngeybun.\
\\xe Underneath is the base of the painting which we call 'rungkalno'.\
\\uv I\
\\sn 2\
\\de painted white ochre lines of division, often with dots along the lines\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 14/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx rurrk\
\\lc kun-rurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\de enclosed space, hole, cave, room of a dwelling\
\\cf kururrk\
\\ce inside\
\
\\lx Rurrkkarrkken\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de  Jungle spring associated with flying foxes near the Kumalbimuk hills west of the Goomadeer [Kumadderr] river. Adjacent to Kanangarridjmeng. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 17/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ruwurrno\
\\ps n.\
\\ge black.soil.plain\
\\de black soil plain\
\\uv E\
\\ur Rembarrnga fv:ruwurrno 'black soil plain'\
\\sd geographic\
\
\\lx rrayawern\
\\lc ku-rrayawern\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de pandanus grove\
\\ng see also fv:dayadayarrhken\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx rroyngu\
\\lc na-rroyngu\
\\ps n.\
\\de kun-derbi term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent nephew or brother's\
son, hearer calls referent nephew (classificatory sister's son).\
\\ee eg. Kalidjan to Bulanj about Wamud\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx rroyngu\
\\lc na-rroyngu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, 1.speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent nephew or\
brother's son, hearer calls referent nephew (classificatory sister's son). 2.My uncle, your son, you are\
my fv:kakkak\
\\cn na-karrng.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx rrulkwern\
\\lc ku-rrulkwern\
\\ps n. vegetation type\
\\de bush, forest\
\
\\lx ukay\
\\ps interj.\
\\de wow!\
\
\\lx Ulbu\
\\va Wulbu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a now extinct patriclan in western Arnhem Land associated with the Amurdak language and with two distinct lineages, one\
sometimes referred to as Ulbu Amurdak and the other as Ulbu Urrirrk (the latter term being a dialect of Amurdak spoken once in the\
Ardahaj [Pawpaw Beach] area of Van Diemens Gulf)\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 09/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx ungke\
\\va ngungke (contraction of fv:nguddangke)\
\\ps poss. pron.\
\\de yours (sing.)\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx uwa\
\\ps interj.\
\\de yes\
\
\\lx wabke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de move something/somebody to another place\
\
\\lx wabme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de shift camp to another place\
\\cf wabwabme\
\\ce stalk prey in hunting (move from one spot to the next).\
\
\\lx wabun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de singing of a 'clever' man, eg. sing up rain, or sing somebody for sorcory.\
\\cf see fv:-kodjwabun\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wadbar\
\\lc man-wadbar\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de fern-leaved grevillea\
\\sc Grevillea pteridifolia\
\\uv Kune kun-rayek\
\\uv Kune kun-kerlk =man-bongko, I =man-dadjek\
\\ee D/Rem =wadbar.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wadda\
\\lc kun-wadda\
\\ps n.\
\\de home, camping place, place on a seasonal camping route\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sy kun-red\
\
\\lx wadda\
\\va waddano\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de circular ground sculpture used at funeral ceremonies after the body has been\
disposed of by burial. All funeral participants stand in the middle of the depression\
of the ground sculpture and are doused with water. The sculpture is said to represent\
the nest or home of fv:ngaldadmurrng the saratoga which makes circular depressions\
on the sandy bottom of billabongs to lay its eggs.\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx waddakudjam\
\\ps adj.\
\\de being of the same lineage and same patriclan\
\\xv Ngane-waddakudjam.\
\\xe We are both from the same country, from the same place.\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx waddanmarr\'fa\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Croton arnhemicus\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx waddanmerre\
\\pr an-, \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Croton_arnhemicus\
\\re fi:Croton_arnhemicus\
\\de kind of woody shrub averaging 1-2 metres, the leaves change to a red colour as they die and fall and were once used as a tobacco\
substitute\
\\xv Waddanmerre an-darleh.\
\\xe The fi:Croton_arnhemicus stalks are used for fire-stick drills.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx wadme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de complete a ceremony (by staying in one place)\
\\xv Bangardi ka-wadme ka-mungbun.\
\\xe Bangardi will finish the ceremony and stay for a long time.\
\
\\lx wadjbud\
\\va adjbud\
\\ps n.\
\\re sand, beach\
\\re beach, sand\
\\de Sand, beach. Probably borrowed from Mawng and Iwaidja fv:adjbud as a synonym to fv:kunkawadj but has accreted the initial semi-vowel to satisfy the preference for initial consonants.\
\\xv Ngal-yahwurdurd Wirriwirriyak nuye darrahmey wanjh bonj. Nangahnang yurruburridjmeng, djalyurruburridjmeng mani yiman kunkawadj kayo manih kanjdji wadjbud.\
\\xe The wife of black-faced cuckoo-shrike, she ripped it open [the string bag] and that was it, she took a quick look around and ran away and she kept running along some white sand, just like down here (in the river bed).\
\\syn kunkawadj\
\\sd geographic\
\\dt 29/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx Wahdjik\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wakmarranj clan estate\
\\uv D, E\
\\lit "Djik's (a mythological being) water"\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx wahken\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\sn 1\
\\de kind of quartzite blade made from a type of quartzite often found in water\
\\sn 2\
\\de kind of quartzite from which the eponymous blades/stone tools are fashioned, found especially in the Bulumo clan estate.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wahwahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de dance the final public 'coming out' section of the Kunabibi ceremony where dancers call out 'wah wah\
wah'.\
\\xv Malayi kabirri-yakwon mayh, kabirri-wahwahme wanjh mulil karri-ngun.\
\\xe Tomorrow they'll finish the ceremony, they'll dance and call out 'wah wah, wah' and then we'll eat the\
feast.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Torresian Crow\
\\ee The crow dreaming ancestor or fv:djimarr lies today at a site in fv:kun-kurulk country\
at a place called fv:Kurrurldurl.\
\\sc Corvus orru\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx wak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de tonsils\
\\xv Yiman wak rerre ka-karrme.\
\\xe Just like a crow has (ie. a tonsil shaped tongue).\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv wak\
\\le crow\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wak\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Melastoma.malabathricum\
\\re fi:Melastoma_malabathricum\
\\de An erect spreading shrub (1-2m) with pink flowers and an edible black fruit with purple pulp. The shrub (and its name) is associated with a spiritual honey being called fv:Wakkewakken. In Kundjeyhmi this plant is called fv:wakkerrang and the name fv:an-wak is restricted only to fi:Leea_rubra. The collapsing of both species into one name for some speakers, especially in Kundedjnjenghmi may be a result of the belief that fv:wakkewakken spirits eat the fruits of both of these plants.\
\\sc Melastoma malabathricum\
\\ur Kdj= wakkerrang\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Leea.rubra\
\\re fi:Leea_rubra\
\\de kind of erect spreading shrub with edible red to black berries\
\\xv An-kodjbang kumekke ka-rri marrek ka-ngun bad ngalengman an-wak ka-djalngun Wakkewakken. An-me anek ka-djalngun.\
\\xe The fi:Aponogeton_elongatus plant is there but she doesn't eat that food, she only eats fi:Leea_rubra (or) fi:Melastoma_polyanthum,\
that Wakkewakken honey spirit. That is the only food that she eats.\
\\ur Kdj= wakkerrang\
\\sc Leea rubra\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx wakadj\
\\pr na-\
\\va ngarridj\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku\
matri-moiety\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Njamed, Borlokko, Borlokko Djang kumekke, kondakah man-berrk, kabbal, kumekke ka-rri. Djal Borlokko Djang,\
fi:must_be ka-bolk-ngeyyo bad nga-bolkbengmidjdanj fi:only ngan-bolkbukkani bininj na-Wakadj.\
\\xe Whatsit, a water python (fi:Bothrochilus_fuscus), water python sacred site is there. On this side there is open woodland and over there\
is a plain. The place must be called 'Borlokko Djang' (that place) but I forget any other name. I only know what that man na-Wakadj\
taught me (about it).\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx wakadj\
\\pr ngal-\
\\pr al-\
\\va ngarridjdjan\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:mardku\
matri-moiety\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Ya Ngarridjdjan ka-borndokdi Burrmi, ngal-Wakadj ngal-kakkak ken ngal-madjewurd, fi:that ngarridjdjan fi:now\
fi:born ba-yimeng kumekke, Burrmi. Ngeyno ngaleng ngal-Wakadj.\
\\xe Yes, Ngarridjdjan Burrmi, she was born there (at the place also called Burrmi). Ngal-wakadj, fi:ngal-kakka 'the one who is my mother,\
your mother's mother, you are my nephew', no I mean fi:ngal-madjewurd 'the one who is my mother, your mother's mother, you are my\
mother's brother'. That Ngarridjdjan she was born there at Burrmi and so she takes her name from her place of birth.\
\\so LBN for xv\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx wakbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de go or pass around to the side of something\
\\xv Ngurri-wakbu djakbarl konda ka-yo wardi kan-baye kadberre, ngurri-yime 'wak wak' ba\
kamak.\
\\xe You all pass around here, there's wasps here, they might bite us. Call out 'wak wak' so it'll be OK (and\
they won't harm you).\
\\sn 2\
\\de be dizzy\
\\xv Nga-kodj-wakbun nga-kodj-borledme.\
\\xe I'm dizzy, my head is spinning around.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wake\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de crawl\
\\cf -kodjdjewake\
\\ce crawl along the ground very low, like a soldier.\
\\sn 2\
\\de walk (of birds and reptiles)\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx waken\
\\ps adv.\
\\de for a little while, not a long time\
\
\\lx waken\
\\ps loc.suffix\
\\de located, from place/habitat (named)\
\\xv Kun-ngolwaken\
\\xe Aeroplane (literally 'in the clouds').\
\\xv Kun-warddewaken.\
\\xe In the rocks.\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx Wakkarra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Crow dreaming place in fv:Kurulk clan estate.\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx Wakkewakken\
\\ps n.\
\\re honey spirit being\
\\de Honey spirit beings who have no body below the waist and are associated with sites in the fv:Ankung Djang estate on the Arnhem Land plateau. fv:Wakkewakken was a subject frequenty painted by the artist Lofty Bardayal Nadjamerrek.\
\\xv Kururrkkurduk, yo, kumeng anme kamarnedi anwak, wakkewakken, daluk or bininj, e wurdyaw, kumekke kabarridi Bibiddoy.\
\\xe At Kururrkkurduk [which literally means 'dark cave\'92], yeah their food is there too, the plant called fv:wak and the wakkewakken spirits, men, women and children, they live there at Bibiddoy.\
\\sd mythology\
\\dt 20/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx wakkidj\
\\ps n.\
\\de fishing line\
\\pdn kk = man-yirrurl\
\
\\lx wakih\
\\ps n.\
\\ge shrimp\
\\re prawn\
\\re river prawns\
\\re kakadu shrimp\
\\re common Kakadu shrimp\
\\re fi:Leptopalaemon_gagadjui\
\\re fi:Macrobrachium_spp.\
\\de River prawns, but possibly also common Kakadu shrimp, used as a generic term for most river prawns, although fi:Macrobrachium bullatum or fv:marddarr (in Kunwinjku at least) is said to be darker.\
\\xv Ngamedngong wagihngong, ngalng, namekke ga-raworren nawu nakkan Nilohlorl [Djnj dialect].\
\\xe Whatsisname, lots of them, shrimps, yabbies, they join together [as a totemic group] at that place Nilorhlorl.\
\\sc Macrobrachium spp, Leptopalaemon gagadjui\
\\dt 31/Oct/2011\
\
\\lx Wakmarranj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Kune and Dangbon fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan to the south east of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Na-Buluken bedberre, Na-Buluken bedberre, na-Bulungong. Kun-dawurro bedberre na-Bulungong nakka nawu ngaleng djal doydoyh Wakmarranj nga-yime ka-djalyirriyo kune Ngolomorro ka-yudme Mobarn kumekke kume kuyngurrmeng\
kunj. Kunj fi:dreaming kaluk kurrmerrinj kumekke ka-yo ngamed kure Dabarlka. Dabarlka an-bokimuk nga-boyolyolme.\
\\xe It belongs to the Bulu clan, it's for Bulu people, all the Bulu mob. That's their clan name, the Bulu people, and my doydoyh, the\
Wakmarranj estate lies in line [parallel] there, the ngolomorro dreaming (spectacled hare wallaby) runs along there at Mobarn, that's\
where it put itself (in Wakmarranj country). That kangaroo dreaming placed itself there at Dabarlka. That big water hole there at Dabarlka is the one I'm talking about.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx wakwan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de be unaware, not know\
\\xv Ka-djal-ni kun-kudji, but might be ka-re nungan marrek ngarr-bengkan, ngarr-wakwan.\
\\xe He just stays there once, but maybe he goes around of his own accord but you and I don't know. We\
don't know.\
\\sn 2\
\\de forget to undertake\
\\xv Ken, djurlu nga-wakwam.\
\\xe Oops, I forgot the matches.\
\\cf kodjdje-wakwan\
\\ce not be aware of something because you were asleep\
\\uv E= warkwan.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wakwarrayal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de kind of crow, smaller than fv:Corvus orru and follows fires, possibly 'little crow'\
\\sc Corvus bennetti\
\
\\lx Wakyoy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Name of a place with a billabong in Marrkolidjban area near Kudjaldordo creek.\
\
\\lx walabi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de triangular framed fishing net, used as a hand scoop net\
\
\\lx walahwala\
\\va badjdjowalahwala\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de stick insect.\
\
\\lx walakkih\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge small\
\\re small\
\\re little bit\
\\de A little bit, small amount.\
\\xv A: Ngudda Kundjeyhmi yi-bengkang yiwokdi? B: Walakkih.\
\\xe A: Do you know how to speak Kundjeyhmi? B: A little bit.\
\\dt 10/Jun/2013\
\
\\lx walakkurd\
\\lc kun-walakkurd\
\\ps n.\
\\re clan lect name\
\\de Lect name for members of the Darnkorlo clan.\
\\cf man-walakkurd\
\\ce small amount (food)\
\
\\lx walakkurd\
\\lc man-walakkurd\
\\ps n.\
\\de small amount (of food)\
\\uv kun-walakkurd clan lect\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx walangari\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Arum.plant\
\\re Arum plant\
\\re fi:Amorphophallus_galbra\
\\de Herbaceous plant of the Arum family with a subterranean tuber which has toxins in it that must be processed before the tuber is rendered edible.\
\\xv Djedbarlh yiman kandidjdjowa kabirri-marnbun, kabirri-dong wanjh mimno ka-yakmen.\
\\xe They make something similar to flour from the Arum plant, they hit it until the seeds are ground up.\
\\sc Amorphophallus galbra\
\\ee There is considerable variation in shape and size of these plants and as a result, different sizes of the same species may have different moiety affiliations and names in Bininj Kunwok. This particualr name is the fv:duwa moiety name and the fv:yirridjdja moiety Kundedjwarre clan lect name is fv:djedbarlh, these two names also being names (synonyms) for the same plant in Dalabon.\
\\sy djedbarlh, man-mayhdedj\
\\uv I (Kundedjwarre fv:duwa patrimoiety clan lect)\
\\ur Kunwalidjaw duwa clan lect name is fv:man-mayhdedj, E =man-djanek, W =man-danek, Kdj, Djnj= an-didjkanku, Dalabon =djedbarl, walangari.\
\\pdn narrenku\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx walanjarra\
\\lc man-walanjarra\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de plant with fruit like grapes\
\\uv =W\
\\uv E=man-dordwern.\
\\nt check, what is 'I'.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx walanjarra\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of tree\
\\sc Nauclea orientalis\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx walawalak\
\\lc na-/ngal-walawalak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd kinship\
\\de referent term for a younger sibling\
\\xv Nungka nuye kornkumo na-walawalak.\
\\xe He is his second father (ie. his father's younger brother).\
\\xv Ngal-badjan walawalak.\
\\xe Second mother (ie. mother's younger sisters).\
\
\\lx walaybun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cut open stomach, disembowel\
\\nt check semantic range\
\
\\lx wale\
\\ps verbal prefix\
\\sn 1\
\\de knowledge or ability pertaining to an OBJ\
\\xv Ngudda yi-karrmen wardi nga-wale-warre.\
\\xe You hold (the baby) otherwise I won't nurse her properly.\
\
\\lx walebengkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de have knowledge about a particular subject or the skill to perform something\
\\xv Konda Wakkewakken maitbi ka-ni ba-yimeng. Marrek nga-bengkan nga-wakwan, bad\
minjbi ngayeman mayali nga-djalyime. Mayali nga-marnewalebengkan.\
\\xe Maybe the Wakkewakken spirit is here in this area, he used to say. I don't know, but I'm just talking about my own ideas about it. I have my own knowledge/insights about its meaning.\
\\dt 27/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx walebonghme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de have, grasp\
\\sn 2\
\\de father a child\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde 1.karrme, 2.bornan.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx walehno\
\\lc kun-walehno\
\\ps n.\
\\de duwa clan lect spoken by na-Kulmarru clan\
\\sy kun-walidjaw.\
\\ee when used with the noun class prefix man- ie. man-walidjaw, the meaning becomes 'small amount'.\
This is the same for the other clan lect names also (kun-walakkurd, kun-djendjenbak, and\
kun-dedjwarre).\
\\xv Man-walidjaw kano.\
\\xe Give me a little bit (of food).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx walem\
\\ps loc.\
\\de south\
\\xv Kun-wernh-walem.\
\\xe A long way south.\
\
\\lx wale-marnbun\
\\ps verb\
\\de carry out an activity correctly eg. hold a baby correctly in the arms, nurse a baby the right way.\
\
\\lx wale-wakwan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de not have knowledge about something.\
\
\\lx wale-warre\
\\ps verb\
\\de perform an activity incorrectly\
\\xv Ngudda yi-karrmen wardi nga-wale-warre.\
\\xe You hold her (the baby) otherwise I'll hold her incorrectly.\
\
\\lx walhwalhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fly wings\
\\uv E\
\\uv I =dolkan.\
\\xv Ka-walhwalhme borrobborro ka-borrme\
\\xe When the chestnut-quilled rock pigeon flies it makes a flapping/whirring noise.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wali\
\\ps check\
\\de turn, denotes turn taking, order of participation\
\\xv ngayeman-wali\
\\xe my turn\
\\xv ngadman-wali\
\\xe our turn\
\\xv yingan-wali\
\\xe your turn\
\\xv Moses-wali\
\\xe Moses' turn.\
\
\\lx walidjaw\
\\lc kun-walidjaw\
\\ps n.\
\\de duwa clan lect spoken by na-Kulmarru clan\
\\sy kun-walehno (not often used).\
\\ee when used with the noun class prefix man- ie. man-walidjaw, the meaning becomes 'small amount'.\
This is the same for the other clan lect names also (kun-walakkurd, kun-djendjenbak, and\
kun-dedjwarre).\
\\xv Man-walidjaw kano.\
\\xe Give me a little bit (of food).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx walidjaw\
\\lc +PREFwalidjaw\
\\ps n.\
\\de small amount\
\\uv na-Kulmarru clan lect\
\\rd na-waliwalidjaw.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx walirdon\
\\va walerdon\
\\ps n.\
\\ge green.ant\
\\re green ant, larger size with wings\
\\de the alate queen form of the green ant fv:bodbang\
\\sc Oecophylla smaragdina\
\\sd insects\
\\p see photo file green ant queen1.jpg; green ant queen2.jpg\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx walirrngno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\sn 1\
\\de uterus\
\\sn 2\
\\de placenta\
\
\\lx walk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de Rembarrnga and Kuninjku circumcision ceremony. The name is also applied to the boys in ritual seclusion in this ceremony.\
\\ee Today the Kuninjku rarely perform this ceremony for their own youths. However the Kuninjku are involved in this ceremony in the form of dancing performance for another tribe conducting the ceremony (usually Burarra, Rembarrnga or Yolngu). Typically, a boy who is an initiate will be sent to the Kuninjku and he will be 'held' in their country for a number of weeks in the lead up to the end of the ceremony.\
\\ee Burarra and Yolngu matha= fv:dhapi\
\\sy djabbi (from Yolngu matha)\
\\xv Bindi-kang walk kure bindi-marne-rarrkwong.\
\\xe They took those initiates to the place where they painted cross-hatching designs on them.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx walnga\
\\lc kun-walnga\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de shape or form 2. body\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-burrk\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx walnga-kurrurdme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de recognise\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde burrk-nan\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx walwalngurru\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lizard.sp.\
\\re Chameleon dragon\
\\re fi:Chelosania_brunnea\
\\de Chameleon dragon.\
\\sc Chelosania brunnea\
\\uv E\
\\ur Djnj= alwalngurru, I= ngalbangurru\
\\pdn kk = kerngborlh\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 26/Aug/2012\
\
\\lx wamarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge long-neck turtle\
\\re long neck turtle\
\\re fi:Chelodina_rugosa\
\\de snake-necked turtle\
\\sc Chelodina rugosa\
\\pdn kk = ngalngarelyi\
\\uv E synonym (also the Rembarrnga name)\
\\ur I= komrdawh, W= ngalmangeyi, Kdj= almangeyi \
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 30/Mar/2012\
\
\\lx wamba\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de shark species, possibly large salt water species.\
\\xv Wamba berd-karnkarn.\
\\xe The fv:wamba shark has a thin tail.\
\
\\lx wamud\
\\pref\
\\va na-kodjok\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\xv Minj dabborrabbolk birri-wayiniwirrinj. Ngayi nga-wam Manbulukarri, nga-bekkang wayarra birri-wayini. Nga-wam\
nga-durndi kure Mumeka nga-djawam Wamud ngan-marneyimeng nakka kun-wok wayarra bedberre.\
\\xe The old people didn't sing (this song). I went to Manbulu Ka-rri and I heard spirit beings singing. I went there and returned to\
Mumeka and I asked Wamud and he told me that the song text was in the language of the spirit beings.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd kinship\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W, Kdj= na-kodjok\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx wamud\
\\pr na-\
\\va kodjok\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (male) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (male)\
\\de male subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Boyen boknang na-Wamud na-wern.\
\\xe Recently na-Wamud saw lots of tracks.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd kinship\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv W, Kdj\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= fv:kodjok\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx wamud\
\\pr ngal-\
\\va kodjdjan\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge subsection\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:yirridjdja patri-moiety and fv:ngarradjku\
matri-moiety\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Ngal-wamud la Na-bangardi kabani-yo, ngale daluk barri-raworrinj barri-djarrkrey. \
\\xe Yes that Ngal-wamud and Na-bangardi husband and wife, that woman joined with the others and they used to travel together.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd kinship\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv W\
\\ur I, E, Djnj= fv:kodjdjan, Kdj= al-wamud\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx wamuddjan\
\\pref\
\\va ngal-kodjok, al-kodjok\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge subsection\
\\re skin name (female)\
\\re subsection (female) of fv:duwa patri-moiety\
\\de female subsection or 'skin' name of fv:duwa patri-moiety and fv:mardku matri-moiety\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Kan-barrhbun ngarrku, kan-dulubun ngarrku kure, ngalekke Buluwana ka-kodjdjabdi,  djongok, kaluk\
ngal-kulmarru, ngarduk ngal-kurrng, wamuddjan, kun-red  ngalengarre kondanj.\
\\xe It would come down on top of us, cover us over, and you and I would be pierced there. That woman Buluwana, her head protrudes and\
stands up in the ground, my mother-in-law of Kulmarru clan, my mother-in-law of Wamuddjan skin and this is her country here.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd kinship\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\ur W= fv:ngal-kodjok, Kdj= al-kodjok\
\\dt 16/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx wandakadjung\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sing ceremonial song cycles\
\\sy kadjung\
\
\\lx wanjdjad\
\\lc man-wanjdjad\
\\va wanjdjadno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de creek, small stream\
\
\\lx wanjdjaddanjburren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de tributary branching off, branching off of a water course.\
\\xv Man-kabo ka-wanjdjad-danjburren.\
\\xe The creek has a tributary.\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx wanjdjadkodjdubbe\
\\pr ka-\
\\ps nom. pred.\
\\ge headwaters.creek\
\\re headwaters of a small tributary\
\\de Headwaters of a small tributary in a larger drainage system.\
\\xv Ka-wohkodjdubbe ka-wohwanjdjadkodjdubbe wanjh an-berrk ka-yiburnbun.\
\\xe The tributary's headwaters arise along the way (towards an escarpment for example), the headwaters appear and then the open country finishes.\
\\sd geographic\
\
\\lx wanjdjadmang\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de water flowing over a wide area such as during a flood or when water spreads over a shallow but wide stretch of a stream\
\\xv Kamwanjdjadmey.\
\\xe the (water) spread everywhere\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wanjdjadngarrkmang\
\\va wanjdjadmang\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de water flowing over a wide area such as during a flood or when water spreads over a shallow but wide stretch of a stream.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wankeno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de pouch of marsupials\
\
\\lx wangakkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de sit down\
\\pde yerrkan\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx wangerreno\
\\ps n.\
\\de offal (kidneys, liver, heart etc) taken from game and lightly roasted on coals before the carcass is\
cooked\
\\ee Dalabon same.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx wanj\
\\lc kun-wanj\
\\va wanjno\
\\ps n.\
\\de armpit\
\\cf -wanjkawurrbun\
\\ce to rub underarm smell on something\
\
\\lx wanjh\
\\ps conjunc.\
\\de then, after that\
\\sy weleng\
\
\\lx wanjkawurrbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de rub underarm smell on something or somebody.\
\
\\lx wanjkurrnginhbalhme\
\\ps v..i\
\\de perspire\
\
\\lx wanjkurrnginhbalhme\
\\ps v..i\
\\de perspire\
\
\\lx wanj-kurrnginhno\
\\ps n.\
\\de underarm sweat\
\
\\lx wanj-kurrnginhno\
\\ps n.\
\\de underarm sweat\
\
\\lx wanjlorrk\
\\lc kun-wanjlorrk\
\\va wanjlorrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de armpit, area on side of body under arm.\
\\xv Na-bang-ni kun-yungki. Birri-yahyameng birri-kuk-kurrmeng. Ngaluk, ngal-badjan\
birri-wanjlorrk-dulubom.\
\\xe They were wild people in those earlier times. They speared her and killed here. The mother was\
speared under the arm\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wanjlorrk\
\\lc kun-wanjlorrk\
\\va wanjlorrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de armpit, area on side of body under arm.\
\\xv Na-bang-ni kun-yungki. Birri-yahyameng birri-kuk-kurrmeng. Ngaluk, ngal-badjan\
birri-wanjlorrk-dulubom.\
\\xe They were wild people in those earlier times. They speared her and killed here. The mother was\
speared under the arm\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wanj-mud\
\\lc kun-wanj-mud\
\\va wanjmudno\
\\ps n.\
\\de underarm hair\
\
\\lx wanj-mud\
\\lc kun-wanj-mud\
\\va wanjmudno\
\\ps n.\
\\de underarm hair\
\
\\lx Wanjngurra\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan on the southern/south-eastern Arnhem Land plateau\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx wanjyikirhmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de arm become dislocated at shoulder\
\\xv Bi-kukburriweng wanjyikirhmiwam.\
\\xe He pushed him and his arm became dislocated at the shoulder.\
\
\\lx wardawarda\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Thespesia_populneoides\
\\re pacific rosewood\
\\re tulip tree\
\\de Pacific rosewood, tulip tree. Grows up to 15m high, with yellow hibiscus-like flowers. Used for spear shafts.\
\\sc Thespesia populneoides\
\\sd plants\
\\uv E\
\\sy djeddam\
\\dt 21/Feb/2015\
\
\\lx wardbukkarra-wardbukkarra\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de spirit, nasty flesh-eating profane spirits or nasty fv:mimih spirits. They wear waist bands of green\
parrot feathers and have no clan name. The are partial to the meat of human facial cheeks.\
\\ee Durrih kabirri-mokkoyh-di. Kun-nguya-yak. Kabirri-mokkoyh-di djorrkkun mak na-barlek mudno.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx warddahwarddahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de wobbling motion, move quickly in zigzag.\
\\xv Bu djenj 'lure' ka-nan ka-warddahwarddahme, ka-ngun.\
\\xe If a fish sees the lure wobbling from side to side, it will eat (bite) it.\
\\xv Yiman nganabbarru ka-berd-warddahwarddahme.\
\\xe Just like a buffaloe's tail jigging from side to side.\
\
\\lx warddaw\
\\va wardaw\
\\ps interjection.\
\\sn 1\
\\de oh I'm tired\
\\sn 2\
\\de oh my goodness\
\\xv Warddaw ngal-bahbang.\
\\xe Oh my goodness she's angry.\
\\sn 3\
\\de used in Kune dialect as a reply to fv:na-wid in teasing and joking to mean 'sorry, just joking'\
\\uv E.\
\\xv A:'Yi-kordwern!' B:'Na-wid!' A:'Wurdaw!'\
\\xe A:You fart too much! B:Hey come on, not me (don't tease me)! A:Sorry, I'm only joking (all this is said\
in jest).\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wardde\
\\lc kun-wardde\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\sn 1\
\\de stone\
\\sn 2\
\\de money\
\\sy kun-bad\
\\pdn kk = kun-bangam\
\\cf kun-warddewardde\
\\ce escarpment, rocky outcrop\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx warddebim\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rock.art\
\\re rock paintings\
\\de paintings on rock, rock art\
\\xv Marrngunj kun-warddebim ka-rri.\
\\xe There are rock paintings at Marrngunj.\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx warddedi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de rock there (is)\
\\xv Kunih kure ka-wardde-di\
\\xe\
\\uv all dialects\
\\ur E, I synonym= -baddi\
\\dt 12/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx warddedjabdi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de outcrop of rock\
\\xv Makka mak mimih kumekke ka-reddi. Manih ka-wardde-djabdi. Makka wanjh mimih\
kumekke kah-di.\
\\xe Mimih also live in that place. There where those boulders are protruding. That's where mimih live.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx warddekarrekarnkudji\
\\lc an-wardde-karrekarnkudji\
\\sd geographic\
\\de butte or column of rock or mushroom rock overhang formation, often resting precariously, with a\
single supporting base\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx warddekudjihkudji\
\\lc an-warddekudjihkudji\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de escarpment outlier country with scattered residuals and/or boulders on the plain.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I = man-warddekudjikudji.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx warddelarr\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\re stone blade\
\\de Stone tool flake, typically quartzite, a by-product of tool making. These flakes are usually the wastage of stone tool processing. The flakes are often kept and used as cutting implements.\
\\xv Kabindi-bukkan kun-warddelarr.\
\\xe They are showing them the stone tool flake/blade.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx warddelobme\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de escarpment line.\
\\xv Kawarddelobme.\
\\xe The escarpment line runs along.\
\
\\lx warddewardde\
\\lc kun-/ka-warddewardde\
\\ps n.\
\\sd geographic\
\\de escarpment, rocky outcrop, very rocky country, land covered in boulders.\
\\pdn kk = bangahbangam.\
\
\\lx Warddjak\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de clan name of two fi:duwa moiety clan estates, one in the middle to upper East Alligator region and another further east on the upper\
Kumadderr (Goomadeer) River district of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Bolkkime wanjh, na-djalkudji namekke, Worrkorl dja Warddjak, bene-bokenh namekke yerri. Duwa rowk namekke. \
\\xe Today they are combined into one clan, Worrkorl and Warddjak [Worrkorl being extinct and Warddjak has succeeded to their estate], the two of them are a joint clan. Both of them are fi:duwa moiety.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx warde\
\\cf See fv:wardi\
\
\\lx wardi\
\\va warde\
\\ps modal\
\\sn 1\
\\de Might, otherwise, lest\'97apprehensional or adversative senses\'97 usually referring to an undesirable outcome.\
\\xv Yi-barnamen warde duruk ka-ngun.\
\\xe Hang it up otherwise the dog will eat it.\
\\xv Ngeywarre nakka yuwn yi-ngeybun, wardi yi-bengbun ngalkka!\
\\xe Don\'92t use that bad name [i.e. your sister\'92s], you might offend her.\
\\pdn kk = marndi (I)\
\\sy marndi (W, Kdj)\
\\so NE grammar, p.69.\
\\dt 03/Aug/2016\
\
\\lx wardi\
\\va wardibu\
\\ps prop. particle\
\\ge proposition\
\\re propositional\
\\de A propositional marker 'just try perform action...'\
\\xv Wardi yim-ray yi-nan.\
\\xe Try and come over here and have a look.\
\\dt 12/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx wardibu\
\\cf See fv:wardi\
\
\\lx wardurrkku\
\\ps n.\
\\de large specimen of Silver Barramundi\
\\sy mankumirli\
\\xv Wardurrkku nakka na-kimuk na-badjan nakka, na-wardurrkku, mankumirli, na-badjan rerre, wardurrkku, na-badjan rerre namekke boken ka-ngey-boken, nawu namekke na-kimukken nawu.\
\\xe 'Wardurrkku' is a large individual, 'wardurrkku' and 'mankumirli' is also the same. These are two names for the big barramundis.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx warlah\
\\ps adj.\
\\de wide, open space\
\\xv kun-bolkwarlah\
\\xe wide open place\
\\xv dangwarlah\
\\xe loud mouth\
\
\\lx warlang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de white-bellied cuckoo-shrike\
\\sc Coracina papuensis\
\\uv I\
\\ur Djnj= mayorrngyorrngh\
\\st check if this indeed an accurate entry. If it is a polysemy entry will be needed relating\
to the ghost bat.\
\\dt 12/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx warlang\
\\ps n.\
\\re Hipposideridae bats\
\\re fi:Macroderma_gigas\
\\re fi:Hipposideros_ater\
\\re fi:Hipposideros_inornata\
\\re fi:Hipposideros_stenotis\
\\de Various bats of the family Hipposideridae but also including the ghost bat (family Megadermatidae) 1. Dusky leaf-nosed bat, 2. Arnhem leaf-nosed bat, 3. Northern leaf-nosed bat, 4. Ghost bat \
\\sc Hipposideros ater, Hipposideros inornata, Hipposideros stenotis, Macroderma gigas\
\\dt 09/Jun/2014\
\\uv E= bumabuma\
\\xv Warlang keb-bikibiki.\
\\xe The ghost bat/ Hipposideros bats have a nose like a pig.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx warlbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de sing magical power into an OBJ.\
\\xv Barlkkan nawu walem-beh kabirri-warlbun. Bu kabirri-burren kabirri-dowen.\
\\xe Those boomerangs from the south, they can sing them. If they hit each other with them then they'll die.\
\
\\lx warlhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de throw\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde we/burriwe\
\\xv Yi-warlhkemen man-bokkadji.\
\\pde Yi-burriwemen man-kole.\
\\xv Man-yirrurl kan-weybu nga-dokan nga-warlhke.\
\\pde Wakkidj kano nga-re nga-we.\
\\xe Throw the spear.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx warlidorn\
\\ps n. insects\
\\de green ant abdomen; eaten. It has a very acidic taste.\
\
\\lx warlkkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de hide\
\\xv Ka-warlkkan ka-rrabuwarlkkan mudnoyi.\
\\xe He hides them, hides the eggs with his feathers.\
\\se warlkkarren\
\\de Hide oneself.\
\\xv Warlkkahwarlkkarrinj.\
\\xv Nga-kelewarlkkarren.\
\\xe I'm hiding because I'm scared.\
\\xe He used to hide himself.\
\\se yiwarlkkan\
\\de Hide X with Y.\
\\xv Na-kudji djirndih kun-dume ba-yiwarlkkarrinj.\
\\xe One quail hid himself away with the backbone.\
\\dt 09/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx warlkkarrah\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de oxeye herring, tarpon\
\\sc Megalops cyprinoides\
\\uv W, Djnj = kalarlba\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx warlkkayken\
\\lc na-warlkkayken\
\\ps adj.\
\\de secret\
\\xv Mardayin, kun-kare, Mardayin nawu na-warlkkayken, yoh warlkkarrinj.\
\\xe The Mardayin ceremony is secret, yes it's hidden (knowledge).\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx warlkwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge do.black.magic\
\\re use sorcery\
\\de perform sorcery on someone\
\
\\lx warnamkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de block a path with something, usually a log.\
\\xv Kun-dulk yi-warnamka karri-bolhbalhme.\
\\xe Get a log and block the path by lying it across.\
\
\\lx warnamyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de camp at a site belonging to another clan and exploit the resources before the land owners arrive.\
\
\\lx Warnbi\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re clan estate name\
\\de regional or estate name in the upper Magela Creek area\
\\xv That Durrubu . Kaluk karri-mang njamed kure Badmardi kun-red, walem bad Djinbiri, Karnarra, Kubowo all that. \
Ka-djangdi kumekke njamed Burarr, Durrubu Kadjang, yoh kadjangdi. An-kabo kaluk bukkan kure anekke Warnbi\
Creek.\
\\xe To Durrubu. Then we go into Badmardi country, south to Djinbiri, Kanarda, Kubowo and all that.  There is a dreaming for the\
Merten's water goanna at Durrubu Kadjang, yes, a sacred site there.  It's on a creek which flows to Warnbi (the Magela).\
\\sd placename\
\\so Bardayal Nadjamerrek\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx warnbu\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Xanthostemon.psidioides\
\\re fi:Xanthostemon_psidioides\
\\de small to medium sized tree (5-10m) in monsoon vine forests in sandstone country\
\\sc Xanthostemon psidioides\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx warnduyhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de go back, return\
\\pde -durndeng\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx warnmak\
\\ps pred. nom.\
\\re happy\
\\de Be happy.\
\\xv Karldurrk ka-warnmakwarnmak ka-rrolkan ka-re.\
\\xe Kookaburra is very happy as he flies around\
\\ur Kdj= yilkmak\
\\dt 22/Jul/2014\
\
\\lx warnmorrhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de leave alone, abandon, ignore, divorce\
\\xv Yun ngurri-ngarnarrbonghmerren ngurri-warnmorrhmen.\
\\pde Yun ngurri-durren ngurri-bawo.\
\\pde -bawon.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx warnwarn\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Brachychiton.megaphyllus\
\\re fi:Brachychiton_megaphyllus\
\\de kind of tree\
\\sc Brachychiton megaphyllus\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sy an-manewarn\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx warnyak\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\de not want\
\\xv Nga-warnyak nga-yo kure mi-kurrambalk.\
\\xe I don't want to sleep inside houses.\
\\ng may also be described as a predicate adjective\
\\pdn kk = -yengyeng.\
\\dt 26/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx waral\
\\lc kun-waral\
\\va waralno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de dead person's spirit (the one that wanders around after death), 2.reflection or shadow,\
3.engraving, a drawing of a figure.\
\\xv ka-waraldi\
\\xe a drawing is there\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx waral-narren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\de look at one's own image in water or mirror\
\
\\lx warambele\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial white forehead bands used by 'inside' participants (fv:warehware) in Kunanbibi ceremony.\
\
\\lx warbonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de float on water\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde warme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx warehware\
\\pl\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial participants in Kunabibi ceremony\
\
\\lx waremen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go into the Kunabibi ceremony\
\\xv Yi-waremen?\
\\xe Are you going into the ceremony?\
\\cf na-ware\
\\ce one who has gone into the Kunabibi ceremony\
\
\\lx ware-yo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be inside the Kunabibi ceremony (often for a long time, weeks, months).\
\\cf warehware (n.pl.)\
\\ce all the men inside the Kunabibi ceremony (the ones who cannot 'come out' until the end)\
\
\\lx waribbu\
\\ps adj.\
\\de different, other\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde -buyika/-biyika\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Waridjngu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan on the south-east Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Ngadberre, ka-djalkadjurren raworrinj Waridjngu Wurrbbarn djal raworrinj. Yiman na-Djordi djalraworrinj na-Madjdjalum raworrinj. \
\\xe It\'92s ours [Wurrbbarn clan and], the Waridjngu and Wurrbbarn grouped together to share everything. Just like the Djordi and Madjdjalum clans join together.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx warme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de float on water\
\\xv Bu rakalk ka-benyawan bininj kun-dulk kabirri-djuhke wanjh ka-warme, la darnki. Bu\
ka-yibme, djarre wanjh.\
\\xe If a sorceror wants to find a (particular) victim, they throw a stick in the water. If it floats then (the victim is) close, if it sinks, then the victim is a long way away.\
\\pdn kk = warbonghme\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W, Kdj= dalkan\
\\dt 24/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx warowme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de swing around\
\
\\lx warradjangkal\
\\ps n.\
\\ge agile.wallaby\
\\re agile wallaby (male)\
\\de male agile wallaby\
\\sc Macropus agilis\
\\cf kornobolo\
\\ce generic agile wallaby\
\\cf merlbbe\
\\ce female agile wallaby\
\\pdn kk = njamdjorrhdjorrh\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur Djnj= kurrulambidj\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx warradjangkal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de male agile wallaby\
\\sc Macropus agilis\
\\cf see fv:kornobolo, fv:merlbbe\
\\pdn kk = njamdjorrhdjorrh\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx warradjme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge swept.away\
\\re swept away by force\
\\de be swept away by water current, be knocked off one's feet in a water course when crossing, be overcome by the power of moving water\
\\xv Ka-djurrhbume kan-warradjme.\
\\xe The waterfall will sweep us away.\
\\sn 2\
\\de be thrown around by the force of wind\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx warrak\
\\ps n.\
\\de Leichhardtian Bony Bream, Freshwater Herring\
\\sc Fluvialosa erebi and Nematolosa erebi.\
\\xv Warrak na-warddeken, ka-werrkmarlbme.\
\\xe The Bony Bream is a stone country fish. It flashes its scales (by turning on its side and reflecting\
sunlight).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx warrakurl\
\\ps n.\
\\re northern brushtail possum, female\
\\re female brushtail possum\
\\re brushtail possum, female\
\\re fi:Trichosumus_arnhemensus female\
\\de Female northern brushtail possum. The male doesn't have a separate name.\
\\xv Ngalu ngal-daluk wanjh ngalekke warrakurl arri-ngeybun ngalu yaw dorrengh warrakurl, djebuyh.\
\\xe The female, she is called fv:warrakurl, that's what we call the female brushtail possum which has a baby.\
\\sc Trichosumus arnhemensus\
\\dt 22/May/2014\
\
\\lx warralarla\
\\ps n.\
\\de Ceremonial pit where funeral showers are taken.\
\
\\lx Warramal\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan in Kakadu National Park\
\\xv Bolkwarramal wanjh kumekke arri-bunjyikani, ngal-kohbanj ngalengarre nga-korlonjhmi dja ngal-Warramal.\
\\xe We carried bamboo spears through Warramal country, and that old lady it was her country, I called her my daughter, she was Warramal clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Warrayhngu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan to the south-east of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Ngali bininj-ni ngalu ngurrurdu borledkerrinj nahni  birridolkang kungol, ngalih wanjh ngalebirri-bawong kukurlk ka-wake. Bulanjdjan ngal-Wurrbbarn. Yo. Ngal-nguyakimuk Bakkarda (Kardbam), Wurrbbarnbulu, Burnungku, Warrayhngu, Kamal. \
\\xe This emu was once a human being and... all the people here associated with her changed into animals (points to a painting illustrating this).  They flew up into the sky and they left her on the ground to walk around. Emu was a woman of Bulanjdjan subsection.  She is\
associated with many clans including Bakkarda-Kardbam, Wurrbbarnbulu, Burnungku, Warrayhngu, and Kamal.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx warradjan\
\\ps n.\
\\ge pig-nosed.turtle\
\\re pig-nosed turtle\
\\de Pig-nosed turtle.\
\\xv Warradjan yiman ka-yime man-biri, la man-bowinjku ka-re. Kun-dedj ka-rrudjerren ka-rrabududje. Kure Mikkinj na-wern.\
\\xe The Pig-nosed turtle is like a salt-water turtle but lives in fresh-water. It buries its rear end and lays eggs in the ground. There are many in Mikkinj valley.\
\\sc Carettochelys insculpta\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx warrdjird\
\\ps n.\
\\ge butcherbird\
\\re butcherbird, pied\
\\de pies butcher bird\
\\xv Warrdjird muddadjdadjmiken baybul kune ka-wukyime, nakka djobbo\
mudbameng.\
\\xe The pied butcherbird is piebald (patches of black and white), that's what it's like, but\
the grey butcherbird has lighter coloured feathers.\
\\sd bird\
\\so LBN 12/Jun/2006\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sc Cracticus nigrogularis\
\\bb Pizzey & Knight 1997:461; Morcombe 2000:310, 311\
\\dt 12/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx warre\
\\lc kun-warre\
\\ps n.\
\\de something bad, bad language or a speech of harsh words\
\\xv Kandi-bekka, ngayi kun-warre nga-wokdi.\
\\xe Listen to me, I've got something unpleasant to say.\
\
\\lx warre\
\\lc PRON./Noun classwarre\
\\ps adj.\
\\de bad, rubbish one, no good\
\\xv Na-warre nga-warnyak.\
\\xe It's no good, I don't want it.\
\
\\lx warrebo\
\\ps v.pref.\
\\re wrong way\
\\de The wrong way, incorrect action, by mistake. May also express speaker\'92s negative attitude towards an action.\
\\xv Barri-warrebowam.\
\\xe They went the wrong way.\
\\xv Kan-warreboyameng.\
\\xe He speared us [and what a bad thing that was].\
\\sy -warrekah\
\\dt 16/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx warrekah\
\\ps part\
\\re all over\
\\de All over the place, everywhere.\
\\xv Daluk barri-wurlhkeng wanjh yiman kayime mak bininj bedman kabarriname warrekah. Ngadman makih daluk ngalmangeyi arri-bulewurlhke.\
\\xe It\'92s women who do this burning just in the same way that men burn country everywhere too. We women use fire to burn the country so we can find long neck turtles.\
\\xv Warreka rey ngalmekke daluk, minj beneyuwirrinj namekke.\
\\xe But even though that woman went around everywhere with him, she did not sleep with her husband.\
\\xv LBN: Law, this country. Ankung Djang, Marlkawo, kure rey,\'85 Dakkalakkarr kure Birba, Wurrkeyele, Wurralele. RL: Rule na-warrekah.\
\\xe LBN: That law is from this country [must share game meat]. Whether it be from Ankung Djang, Marlkawo, that law was observed at Birba, Wurrkeyele, Wurralele [estate names]. RL: A rule for everywhere.\
\\dt 05/Jan/2016\
\
\\lx warremen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go bad, go rotten, become weak\
\\xv warreminj\
\\xe worn out\
\\xv Nga-ngudj-warreminj\
\\xe I'm tired/My body is weak.\
\\xv Njilng-warre-ni.\
\\xe S/he was unhappy.\
\
\\lx warreng\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge oh.dear\
\\re oh dear, \
\\de interjection used when something does not work as intended e.g. if something breaks suddenly. The term is always followed by a possessive pronoun. It is a kind of curse such as in English 'Oh shit' or 'Oh damn it.'\
\\xv Warreng nuye.\
\\xe His 'rubbish thing' has broken damn it/Oh shit it's busted.\
\\xv Warreng ke.\
\\xe Your rubbish thing has broken, damn it.\
\\xv Warreng bedberre, warreng ngarrewoneng etc.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx warrewon\
\\ps v.t\
\\sn 1\
\\de ruin, damage\
\\xv A:Mak njale birri-bimbom? Kare kareminj. B:Yoh kareminj mandjewk warrewong.\
\\xe A:What else have they painted here, some of it's too faint. B:Yes the rain has spoiled it.\
\\sn 2\
\\de make a mistake\
\\xv Kenh nga-warrewong, nga-birli-warrewong.\
\\xe Oops, I didn't light the fire properly.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx warrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re Throw down.\
\\de Throw down onto the ground, cause to fall or flop down.\
\\se kukwarrawarrhke\
\\de Knock down fruit from a tree.\
\\xv Ngalyawk ba-bidbom ba-kukwarrawarrhkeng an-djarduk.\
\\xe The young woman climbed up and knocked down the bush apple fruit.\
\\dt 19/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx warrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fall or flop to the ground\
\\xv Yi-wernhdukka warde kawarrhme.\
\\xe Tie it securely or else it might fall down.\
\
\\lx warribo\
\\ps n.\
\\de swear words, obscenities\
\\xv Birri-wurlhkeng birri-bekkang kah-wowme kure kuddum "Wa, wa, wa", ben-duy warribo\
ben-duy, ben-duy, ben-duy.\
\\xe They lit a blaze (to flush him out) and heard him at the top yelling in pain"Ah ah ah," and swearing\
obscenities at them.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx warridj\
\\ps adv.\
\\re also, as well\
\\de Also, as well, in addition.\
\\xv Man-mim kaben-birlwon. Kun-dad dja mak kun-wel bedberre, kaben-njam-warrewon warridj.\
\\xe It disfigures their eyes (magpie geese). Their legs and wings and also their intestines (are affected).\
\\xv Mani dirdde kukkuken dja man-kung warridj.\
\\xe This dilly bag is for water and also honey.\
\\dt 17/Aug/2015\
\
\\lx warrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de scratch around on the ground, normally used to describe the action of animals such as birds.\
\
\\lx Warrkwarrk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Kunib'dji group fi:duwa moiety (in Ndj\'e9bbana language is fi:dj\'f3wanga) patriclan in the mouth of the Liverpool River\
\\ee The Warrkwarrk have a very close relationship with the Anyirrburala clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx warrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swim freestyle\
\
\\lx wawahke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cause to wobble\
\\cf ngan-denge-wawahkeng\
\\ce It forced me off my feet/ made me wobble.\
\\xv Nga-djowkkeng kure bo-lobmeng, nga-djilowhmiwam wanjh ngan-denge-wawahkeng.\
\\xe I waded across where the water was running fast and the current nearly forced me off my feet.\
\
\\lx wawahme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de wobble, stumble\
\
\\lx wayalhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de shine a light or torch\
\\xv Ngan-wayalhmeng.\
\\xe He shone the torch on me.\
\
\\lx wayarra\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de profane ghost, demon\
\\xv Nakudji wam djangkang nang dungyibmeng. Keleminj wayarrakenh.\
\\xe A man went hunting and saw the sun set. He grew afraid of ghosts.\
\\sn 2\
\\de term used by cross sex siblings to refer to each other, including use as a fv:kun-derbi term.\
\\sn 3\
\\de a term used as an insult/swearing\
\\xv Ngurri-wayarra ngurri-mimday-badjan.\
\\xe You're all a bunch of big-eyed demons!\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx Waybburda\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Name of an estate or fv:kun-ngeybadjan in the Cadell River region.\
\\sd estate\
\
\\lx wayhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge lift\
\\re lift\
\\de lift\
\\xv Barddukkayi bad dukkang warrewong, dukkang dolhmeng bi-marneyimeng bukka yi-marnburrimen nga-reydolhme\
yimeng. Dukkang wayhkeng nawu wurlebmeng wayhkeng na dukkang wayhkeng na berre-kaddum ('towards the top of\
the bank ie. up', outside = kuberrk) Kure kuronjhkah ku-berrk. Reybidbuyi ba ku-berrk birri-buyi rey-bidbom nawu\
kuyin bidbom wanjh yerrkmeng na.  \
\\xe He should have tied up its legs as well but he didn't do it properly, so he came to the surface and said to his brother "Get ready when I\
come up out of the water again", he said. The brother who was in the water tied up the crocodile and lifted it up out of the water\
towards the bank. He was there in the water coming out. He climbed up with the crocodile and nearly reached the top of the bank when\
the rope came loose. \
\\xv Ma yawurrinj ngurri-wayhkemen ngurri-kuk-kurrmen.\
\\xe OK you young men, lift it and place the body (there).\
\\so example 1- Lena Yarinkura (E), example 2- John Dalngadalnga\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx wayhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge rise.up\
\\re rise up, be lifted\
\\de be lifted up, rise up\
\\xv Nga-nang koyek bu kunak ba-wayhmeng. \
\\xe I saw to the east that fire had risen up.\
\\xv Nakka nungka bininj namekke nalkbom, mayh dolkang njamed wayhwayhmeng wanjh bonj ben-yibkeng wanjh\
kun-wardde birri-yimerranj \
\\xe But it was a human child that was crying and that serpent rose up and took them down into the ground, and they turned into stone.\
\\dt 24/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx wayibbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de use a hinged frame fishing net in the water in an opening and closing manner.\
\\xv Kabirri-wayibbun walabi.\
\\xe They use hinged-frame fishing nets.\
\
\\lx wayini\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sing\
\\xv Munguyh, birri-wayiniwirrinj birri-rayi, birri-yimeninj "Wardbukkarrawardbukkarra\
djingakbangakba nguyunguy kayakay."\
\\xe They kept walking and singing as they went along. "Wardbukkarrawardbukkarra djingakbangakba\
nguyunguy kayakay."\
\\pdn kk = njolobonghme\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wayudme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de wave with hand, motion to someone\
\\xv Ngarr-ben-wayudme.\
\\xe Let's wave to them.\
\\xv Ngarr-ben-wayudme kure kane-re kure karri-kolung.\
\\xe Let's wave to them where we are going down there. (?) (Words of fv:wurrurrmi song)\
\
\\lx wayuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de white water lily\
\\sc Nymphaea sp.\
\\pde\
\
\\lx wayuk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de waterlily\
\\sc Nymphaea violacea\
\
\\lx wayukkirrikid\
\\lc ngalwayukkirrikid\
\\ps n.\
\\ge swamp.hen\
\\re swamp hen\
\\re purple swamp hen\
\\re fi:Porphyrio_porphyrio\
\\de Purple swamp hen.\
\\sc Porphyrio porphyrio\
\\uv I\
\\ur Kdj= almanjdjurlkkadj\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 18/Apr/2014\
\
\\lx we\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de throw\
\\xv Weng.\
\\xe S/he threw it.\
\\xv kuk-werrinj\
\\xe he threw himself down\
\\xv Yi-bo-wemen.\
\\xe Throw out the water.\
\\pdn kk = warhlke.\
\
\\lx weldi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de having wings\
\\xv Murnun minj ka-weldi.\
\\xe The dugong doesn't have any wings (fins).\
\
\\lx weleberrkmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de wrinkle, droop\
\\xv Worro ngal-kohbanj merlem-weleberrkminj.\
\\xe That poor old lady's stomach is all wrinkled.\
\
\\lx weleng\
\\ps time adv.\
\\de then, next\
\\xv Weleng kumekebe bene-dolkkang bene-djowkkeng kabono.\
\
\\lx weleng\
\\ps v.pref.\
\\de and then\
\\xv Bedda kabirri-dokme wanjh ngarr-weleng-re.\
\\xe They'll go first and then you and I will go after.\
\
\\lx weleng\
\\va welengken\
\\ps n.\
\\re responsible party\
\\de The responsible party, the one doing the action in topic. More specifically the person responsible for killing game.\
\\xv Nangale welengken?\
\\xe Who killed it?\
\\xv Wanjh rerre rerre ngundi-bukkan ngudberre karri-dadje ngadmanwali\
welengken.\
\\xe Then next time they will show you and we will be responsible for cutting them ourselves.\
\\ng Can be used in predicative constructions with pronominal prefixes.\
\\xv Nungka na-weleng.\
\\xe Him, he's the one who did it.\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx welengname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re blame\
\\de Blame.\
\\sy djuhbun\
\\dt 22/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx welewelme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\re hanging down (of many)\
\\de Hanging down all over the place.\
\\xv An-dakdjarr ka-welewelme.\
\\xe There are aerial roots hanging down all around.\
\\sn 2\
\\re hanging around\
\\de Hanging around everywhere, there be many in a place.\
\\xv Ngalbadbulu Kunburray kure njilhmi ka-rri, ka-welewelme barrk.\
\\xe At Ngalbadbulu in the Kunburray area, there is a spring and there are lots of black\
wallaroos.\
\\so LBN\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 03/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx welhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de spin around\
\\xv Kodjok Bamdjelk ka-berdwelhwelhme dayadayarrhken.\
\\xe The mythical Kodjok Bamdjelk has penes that spin around in the pandanus groves.\
\
\\lx welno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de wings\
\
\\lx welyi\
\\lc man-welyi\
\\ps n.\
\\de aeroplane\
\\lit 'having wings'\
\
\\lx wendi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge be.high.up\
\
\\de sit up high\
\\xv Djaddokorddokord ka-wendi kun-dulk-kah.\
\\xe The Northern Rosella is sitting in the tree.\
\
\\lx weng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Phascogale\
\\sc Phascogale pirata\
\\sy wumbu\
\\uv Kune\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx wenjhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de deceive someone by pretence, pretend that some other state of affairs is the case.\
\\xv Ngudda njale-ken konda ngudda yi-borledme, yi-wenjhme daluk-kenh.\
\\xe What are you hanging around here for, you must have a girlfriend here.\
\\xv Yun kan-marnewenjhme, nga-bengkan kan-wurrhke.\
\\xe Don't play tricks with me, your trying to fool me.\
\\xv Nga-marneyimeng, "Ngudda yi-bekkang kun-wok?", la ngan-wokmey 'larrk',\
ngan-marnewenjhmeng.\
\\xe I told him "Have you heard that story?" "No," he said, but he was tricking me.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx weleyh\
\\ps n.\
\\re red-winged parrot\
\\re fi:Aprosmictus_erythropterus\
\\de Red-winged parrot (also known as red-shouldered parrot).\
\\sc Aprosmistus erythropterus.\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur M= weleyhweleyh, Kdj, W= weleyh\
\\ur fv:Kun-walidjaw clan lect name= djadberlhberlh\
\\sd birds\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wern\
\\ps adj.\
\\de many, big mobs\
\\xv Kumekke di ngarri-bonguneng wanjh nungka kun-madj kurrmeng wanjh ngarri-wam ngarri-wern.\
\\xe We drank tea there, and then he put his swag down and then many of us set off.\
\\xv Man-wern nguneng dedjwarlah.\
\\xe He ate heaps of them the greedy guts.\
\\pdn kk = korrongko\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx werne\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de pelican\
\\sc Pelecanus conspicillatus\
\\uv I \
\\ur W=makkakkurr\
\\ee REM = mula\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wernh\
\\ps v. pref.\
\\sn 1\
\\de fully, satisfactorily\
\\xv Yi-wernhbu!\
\\xe Give it a good whack!\
\\sn 2\
\\de further, to completion\
\\xv ...la nungan na-wernwarre duninj namekke nawu bom mayh kun-wernh yungki djamdi kah-djamdi bonj.\
\\xe The older brother who had killed the animal hunting, he had been stuck up (on a rock ledge) since a really long time before, he was stuck up there for good.\
\\sn 3\
\\de very, exceptionally\
\\xv Na-wernhkimuk ngalyod.\
\\xe A really very big rainbow serpent.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx wernki\
\\ps adv.\
\\de quickly, fast\
\\xv Woh djenj yikahwi ngurri-we \'91Woy, wakkidj nane karri-we nuk djenj-yak, bad nungka ka-karrme ka-rrurndiwe, djidjnguk nawu, nungkah nuye, djenj really ngad nungka ngarr-marnedjamdi nungka djidjnguk, arri-djanwohme yiman arri-yime \'91kan-won djidjnguk\'92 djenj wanjh ka-munkewe kabarri-mang wakkidj, kabarri-we, yawoyhno kabarri-yime \'91Kan-wo wernki na-wern\'92 wanjh na-wern maitbi kaban-won fi:five_or_four, ka-we ka-ngungun ka-we ka-ngun ka-we ka-ngun wanjh, ka-nan bonj ba-wukbarlmeng ba-yimeng ba-yakwong barri-yakwong kure ka-munkewe. \
\\xe Yes, sometimes when we go fishing we might say \'91The fish are not biting today\'92 but it\'92s really Djidjnguk who is refusing to allow us to catch them because they are his fish and we are only bludging off him. We hang around hoping to get someting from him and so we call out to him \'91Djidjnguk, give us some fish, quickly\'92 and then he might send us some fish to bite our fishing lines and so when we catch one we sing out again to him \'91Djidjnguk, give us a big mob of fish\'92. And so then we might catch quite a few fish, maybe four or five. Djidjnguk watches as he lets the fish bite our line, we throw in and catch one, throw in again and catch until he decides we have enough, our bags are full and the fishermen have finished all he has to give us.\
\
\\lx wernrawon\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de accumulate or attend many (more than three) ceremonies\
\\xv Na-komkare wernrawong.\
\\xe He is fully 'initiated'.\
\
\\lx wernwarre\
\\lc na-wernwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\de older brother, referent\
\
\\lx wernwarre\
\\lc na-/ngal-wernwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\de the elder sibling\
\\xv kornkumo wernwarre/ kornkumo walawalakud\
\\xe older father (actual father's older brother)/ younger father (actual father's younger brother). A child's\
father's brothers are also called 'father'. The same applies for mother's sisters.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wernwarre\
\\lc ngal-wernwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\de older sister (referent).\
\
\\lx werhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de vomit\
\
\\lx werre\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de come in large numbers\
\\xv Djenj ka-kuk-werren.\
\\xe There are too many fish.\
\
\\lx werrhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de clear or clean an area of ground of plants and sticks, rake up rubbish etc.\
\\xv Birri-marne-werrhwerrhmeng Mehme barrhburrinj.\
\\xe They raked up and Mehme covered himself over (with leaves and grass etc).\
\\sn 2\
\\de rummage through looking for something.\
\\xv Na-ngale ngan-marne-madj-werrwerrhmeng.\
\\xe Who's been rummaging through my bag.\
\\sn 3\
\\de Clearing of clouds after a storm\
\
\\lx werrk\
\\ps adv. (imperative)\
\\sn 1\
\\de hurry up\
\\sn 2\
\\de first (in series)\
\\xv Na-ngale werrk?\
\\xe Who will go first?\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx werrkburren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de shed skin\
\\xv Bu ngarri-bun berk minj ka-rrowen, ka-yo wanjh ka-werrkburren, kurlahno ka-re 'but'\
ka-rrarrkid ka-re.\
\\xe If we try and kill a deaf adder snake it doesn't die, it only sleeps and then sheds its skin, the skin\
comes off and it keeps going alive.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx werrk-kerrnge\
\\ps n.\
\\de new skin after the old has been shed (typically of snakes).\
\\xv Ngalih werrk-kerrnge-wali, werrkno ngal-kerrnge.\
\\xe This is now the new skin, the new skin after shedding.\
\
\\lx werrkno\
\\ps n.\
\\de shed skin, substance which has peeled off.\
\\xv Weleng ngaleng mayh, ngalmudj, werrkburrinj, werrkburrinj kulahno wam, werrkno wam.\
\\xe Then this animal here, rainbow serpent, she shed her skin, shed it off and that skin is gone, the shed\
skin is gone.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx weyakweyak\
\\ps n.\
\\ge cuckoo.shrike\
\\re black-faced cuckoo shrike\
\\de black-faced cuckoo shrike\
\\xv Weyakweyak ba-kurlbakani kurlba ba-rey. Bayimi 'yuy yuy' ba-kayhmi ba-yuyhmirey, fi:that kurlba ba-kadjungi fi:line_up anekke kun-wardde fi:line ka-djale ba-yibmeng konda, kalkberd, nakkan Nawarray-beh ba-rrolkang. \
\\xe Black-faced cuckoo shrike fi:(Coracina_novaehollandiae) followed the trail of blood. He groaned 'yuy yuy', and went along calling out 'yuy' and he followed the blood and these rocks are all lined up [indicating the route the kangaroo took] and he keeps going and sank here, that male euro who came from Nawarray.\
\\sc Coracina novaehollandiae\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I = wirriwirriyak\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 16/May/2007\
\
\\lx weybun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de give\
\\pde -won\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx weykan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge sell\
\\re sell something\
\\de Sell something.\
\\xv Yiddok muddikang makkan kabirri-weykan?\
\\xe Are they selling that car?\
\\sn 2\
\\re hand over\
\\de Hand over, transfer ownership, give gift.\
\\xv Kabirri-yakwon wanjh mamurrng dja kun-madj kabirri-weykan.\
\\xe When they finish [the ceremony] they\'92ll hand over the mamurrng [staff] and the goods [gifts as payments].\
\\dt 03/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx wi\
\\ps clitic\
\\de only\
\\xv Manawukan-wi ngurri-re?\
\\xe Are you only going to Maningrida?\
\\xv Manin yawurrinj-wi kabirri-bidbun.\
\\xe Only the young men can get in this one (truck).\
\
\\lx wid\
\\pr na-, ngal-, man-, ku-,birri-, etc.\
\\sn 1\
\\de that other one, wrong one\
\\xv birri-wid\
\\xe that other mob\
\\xv Ngalngale ngalkka? Kalidjan ngalekke. Ngal-wid.\
\\xe Who is that woman? That's Kalidjan. No not her (it's another person).\
\\sn 2\
\\de a response to teasing 'hey, I don't like it'.\
\\xv Kun-red ke Mankorlord kun-bolkwarre! Ku-wid, kun-bolkmak!\
\\xe Your country Mankorlord it's a rubbish place! (said in jest) Hey, no it's not, it's a good place.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Widkuna\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate with billabong.\
\
\\lx widme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de dislike\
\
\\lx widnan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de hate, dislike\
\\xv Birrim-durndi kabirri-bolk-widnan birri-yimeng.\
\\xe They came back, they hate that place.\
\
\\lx widjik\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de black-faced cuckoo shrike\
\\uv E\
\\uv I=wirriwirriyak\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx widjkurnkurn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de barramundi\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde namarnkorl, birlmu\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx widjme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de whistle\
\
\\lx widjung\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de point or poke\
\\xv 'Kabi-wayudwayudme ka-wohnan kabi-nan ka-yimarne-bolkwidjung.'\
\\xe He waves to him as he watches out for him and points at the place for him. (Words of fv:wurrurrumi\
song).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wikwik\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de white-throated honey eater, little friar bird\
\\sc Melithreptus albogularis, Philemon citreogularis\
\\ee The name fv:wikwik refers to all the small honeyeaters.\
\\cf kawolh\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Wilirrku\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan in Kakadu National Park\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx wilk\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge hot coals\
\\re coals from fire\
\\de Red hot coals.\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx wilkdeng\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cook under ashes, as for damper or fish\
\
\\lx wilkmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de take out of the ashes (cooking).\
\\xv Birlmu ruy kure kun-rak. Na-kudji bininj wilkmey.\
\\xe A barramundi was cooking on the fire. A man took it out of the ashes.\
\
\\lx wirlam\
\\ps n.\
\\ge raft\
\\re stringybark raft\
\\re raft made of sringybark\
\\de Raft made from stringybark.\
\\uv W\
\\ur Kdj= wularl, bularl\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 18/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx windilk\
\\va wirndilk, man-wirndilk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Scarlet bloodroot. Tall long-stemmed strap-leaved herb with red flowers.\
\\sc Haemodorum coccineum\
\\xv Man-me ngurrurdu kabirri-ngun burrurnburrurn dja mani kabirri-ngun windilk, windilk mimno.\
\\xe Food that emus eat includes dodder laurel berries and they also eat scarlet bloodroot, the seeds.\
\\ee Flowers and roots used to extract a brownish dye for weaving. Emus eat the seeds.\
\\sy man-bardrayek, kala (from English 'colour')\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx winhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\re defeat in sport\
\\de To win over somebody, e.g. in a sporting competition.\
\\sn 2\
\\re win a prize or money\
\\de Win a prize or money.\
\\uv I, E\
\\so < English 'win'.\
\\dt 24/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx winjhwinjh\
\\pr an-, man-, \'f8\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Grevillea.dryandri\
\\re fi:Grevillea_dryandri\
\\de kind of Grevillea shrub\
\\xv Njamed makih yiman ka-yime an-dadjek ngamed winjhwinjh nawu ku-wardde kayo. Lorlbban ka-kurrme njamed\
man-kung. \
\\xe And there's another one too, similar to fi:Grevillea_pteridifolia,whatsit fi:Grevillea_dryandri which is in the rock country also.\
fv:Lorlbban bees use those [flowers] to make honey.\
\\sc Grevillea dryandri\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx winjku\
\\pr Kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language name\
\\de language name for dialect of Bininj Kunwok with the largest number of speakers\
\\xv Bedda karrikad Kunwinjku nawu kun-kerlk kabirri-wokdi, la ngad kun-rayek ngarri-wokdi.\
\\xe Those people to the west speak fv:Kunwinjku which is the 'soft' dialect but we [Kuninjku] speak the 'hard' dialect.\
\\ee Each dialect group in Bininj Kunwok often has its own name for each of the other language varieties in the Bininj Kunwok dialect\
chain. Kunwinjku speakers refer to their variety by this label fvKunwinjku. Kuninjku speakers may refer to it as fv:Kunrinjku or\
fv:Kunkerlk. Kune speakers call it fv:Kundangburddjikaberrk. Kundedjnjenghmi speakers refer to Kunwinjku as fv:Kundangyohmi.\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx winjkuwarre\
\\pref\
\\va winjkuhwarre\
\\pr na-, ngal-, nga-, yi-, birri- etc\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge non.Kunwinjku.speaker\
\\re unable to speak Kunwinjku\
\\de unable to speak Bininj Kunwok, a non-Kunwinjku speaking person\
\\xv Dangbon, winjkuhwarre ... kaluk nga-djalwam nga-bekkang Dangbon, en nga-welengbengkani nawu ngan-woknani,  \
kukku, an-marnengeybuni. Nga-re nga-djangkani, ngan-marnengeybuyi, n\'fcnda dah-djangkan, n\'fcnda manjh Wamud,\
ngan-marneyimi \'93Kek\'94 nga-yimi. Bad nga-wakwani mak nga-yimi, Kunwinjku ke yi-wokdin kan-marneyimen,\
Dangbon manj nga-wakwani. Nga-djalwam nga-bengkang fi:now. \
\\xe He spoke Dangbon, he couldn't talk Bininj Kunwok and so as I went along [with him] I listened to the Dangbon language and\
eventually I understood it when I heard him calling out to me telling me the names of things in Dangbon like 'water'. Once when I went\
hunting he said things to me in Dangbon \'93[in Dangbon] You go hunting and get some meat Wamud\'94 he said to me.  \'93OK then\'94 I\
said, but I didn't have a clue what he was telling me. I didn't know and I said \'93Tell me in Kunwinjku so I  can understand you\'94. I\
couldn't understand Dangbon then. I kept working at it and now I know that language now.\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\so LBN\
\\cf winjkuwarreni\
\\ce not be able to speak Kunwinjku [stative, past tense]\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\
\\lx winjkuwarreni\
\\pr ba-, \'f8\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr winjku 'Kunwinjku language' +warre 'bad' +ni 'stative verb'\
\\ge not.Kunwinjku.speaker\
\\re unable to speak Kunwinjku/Bininj Kunwok\
\\de was not able to speak Bininj Kunwok\
\\xv Ba-winjkuwarreni, Dangbon ba-djalwokdiwokdi.\
\\xe He couldn't speak Kunwinjku, he only spoke Dangbon.\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\so JK, LBN\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx wirdilwirdil\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de grass sp. used for extracting a red dye for weaving.\
\\sc Haemadorum brevicauli\
\\uv Kun-walidjaw clan lect and others.\
\\uv I=wirndilk\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wirdu\
\\pr man-, an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Carallia.brachiata\
\\re fi:Carallia_brachiata\
\\de Tree usually to 10m but can grow taller, with a small smooth globular edible berry with persistent calyx at the tip, 5-7 mm diameter, dark red to black when ripe; single seeded. The fruits appear in fv:kurrung 'build-up' season, most plentiful in fv:kunumeleng.\
\\xv Man-wirdu ka-rung, karri-re karri-ngun. \
\\xe The fi:Carallia_brachiata are ripening, lets go and eat them.\
\\sc Carallia brachiata\
\\uv I, E, Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx Wirl\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Barabba clan estate, "wayarra" (ghost) place\
\\ee 'bolk-djamun'\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wirlihwirlih\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de ceremonial forked pole which participants in the Wubarr ceremony climbed up.\
\\xv 'Bern' ngan-bim-mey korroko, ngayi nga-barndi kure wirlihwirlih, nga-yawurrinj-ni.\
\\xe Berndt (Ronald Berndt, the anthropologist) took a photograph of me a long time ago when as a young\
man I climbed up the ceremonial Wubarr pole.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wirlire\
\\cf appears in fv:wohwirlire\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wirliwirlih\
\\ps n.\
\\re galah\
\\re fi:Cacatua_rosiecapilla\
\\de Galah.\
\\sc Cacatua rosiecapilla\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx wirlmurr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de multi-pronged 'fish wire' spear\
\\uv W\
\\uv I=djalakiradj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wirndilk\
\\va wirnilk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de 'kala' (red 'colour', a dye plant)\
\\sc Haemadorum brevicauli\
\\ee Short grass with red colour at base. Used as a dye for weaving.\
\\uv Kun-walidjaw clan lect=wirdilwirdil.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wirndilng\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Cyperas.scariosus\
\\re fi:Cyperas_scariosus\
\\de kind of grass, the roots of which are used as a dye for colouring pandanus fibre used in basket making\
\\sc Cyperas scariosus\
\\uv Djnj\
\\cf windilk\
\\sd plant \
\\dt 09/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx wirnwirnh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de crested hawk\
\\sc Aviceda subcristata\
\\uv Kune = mowirn\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wirmeng\
\\lc nga-wirmeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka or fv:mamamh, speaker calls referent\
fv:kakkak, hearer calls referent brother-in-law .\
\\cn yi-wirmeng.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wirmeng\
\\lc yi-wirmeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, speaker and hearer call each other fv:makka, speaker calls referent in-law? and hearer calls referent fv:kakkak.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wirriwirri\
\\va marrawirriwirri\
\\ps prop. n. mythology\
\\de Bush spirits similar to fv:Mimih spirits.\
\
\\lx wirriwirriyak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Black-faced cuckoo shrike\
\\sc Coracina novaehollandiae\
\\uv I\
\\uv Djnj = weyakweyak\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wirrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de scratch, engrave\
\\xv Njale ngun-wirrkmeng?\
\\xe What scratched you?\
\
\\lx wiw\
\\ps interj.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Shit!\
\\re Shit! Oh my god! Oh dear me!\
\\de Interjection used to express a sudden unexpected fright. \'91shit\'92, \'91oh my god\'92.\
\\xv Wiw! Nakka ngan-bayemeninj.\
\\xe Shit! It could have bitten me.\
\\sn 2\
\\re oh dear me\
\\de Interjection expressing self pity \'91oh dear me\'92.\
\\xv Wiw, nga-kukmarladja!\
\\xe Oh dear! I'm just a poor thing.\
\\dt 24/May/2015\
\
\\lx wiwol\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\sn 1\
\\de brown goshawk\
\\sc Accipiter fasciatus\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= bodbod\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wo\
\\va woh\
\\ps interj.\
\\de yes\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I, E = yoh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wob\
\\ps adj.\
\\re light weight\
\\ge light\
\\sn 1\
\\de light in weight\
\\xv na-wohwob\
\\xe very light\
\\xv Wo, yi-nan ka-yime ngal-kimuk ngal-daluk yikabeh na-rangem ngal-yahwurd ngal-wob wanjh.\
\\xe You can see that the female (emu) is bigger and sometimes the males are smaller and lighter (in weight).\
\\sn 2\
\\re trivial\
\\re superficial\
\\de superficial, trivial, lacking in depth and sriousness\
\\xv Bad fi:'tourist_guide' wob makka fi:'tourist_guide' bad makka djunggay kakarrme kun-kimuk djob nawu. Kunkimuk,\
yiman ka-yime na-redweleng nuye ka-karrme.\
\\xe  But the analogy of the meaning of the term fi:dungkay with a 'tourist guide' is quite superficial and trivial because the fi:djunggay has a\
much more profound job. It is as significant or important as that of a traditional land owner (in the scheme of traditional land\
ownership issues).\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx wobe\
\\lc kun-wobe\
\\va wobeno\
\\ps n.\
\\de lungs\
\
\\lx wobon\
\\ps n.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\de goanna species, an exceptionally large specimen of Varanus gouldii.\
\\pdn kk = mayawurlhwurl\
\
\\lx wodberr\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\va wodberr fs:(no_prefix)\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge cocky.apple\
\\re cocky apple\
\\re fi:Planchonia_careya\
\\sd plant\
\\de cocky apple\
\\sc Planchonia careya\
\\sy djarnhba\
\\uv I\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Buchanania.obovata\
\\re short variety of the green plum tree\
\\re fi:Buchanania_obovata (short variety)\
\\de shortvariety of the green plum, fi:Buchanania_obovata, taller variety is called fv:an-moyi\
\\xv Man-me alengarre ka-karrme bu kunumeleng ka-yime ane fs:first_storm wanjh kunukka an-ngamed ka-ngun\
an-wodberr,  an-dudjmi manu an-dedjuhdjumbung an-wodberr, an-burningkid ka-yime ka-ngun kune ka-yime bakno\
ka-ngun mimno  ka-yawmimngun mane an-dadjek ka-mimngun an-karnbirr ka-mimngun bakno ka-re ka-ngun yika\
mak kun-wardde ka-ngun ka-komborndurren kunuh ka-warddengun.\
\\xe There is emu food there but in fv:kunumeleng season, the first wet season storms, she eats fruit of the fi:Buchanania_obovata tree, the short varieties called fv:an-wodberr and also water weed and various seeds, little seeds of the fern-leafed grevillea and fi:Acacia_oncinocarpa and in order to satisfy her with a balanced meal she has a craving for small stones.\
\\sc Buchanania obovata\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 16/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx wodbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de swat, slap 2. hit somebody with a branch of leaves to heal them\
\\xv Man-kordang kun-worr bi-wodbom.\
\\xe The 'magic man' thrashed her with leaves (to heal her).\
\
\\lx Wodburreni\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Hill by the upper East Alligator River, a Birndu Djang (Mosquito Dreaming) site. The site name literally means 'He swatted himself with a branch'. Wodburreni is about 40km southeast (upstream) from Cahill's Crossing, downstream from Wurrmindabba. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx wodj\
\\lc man-wodj\
\\ps n.\
\\de log\
\\xv Man-wodj-kare karri-dorrorroke.\
\\xe Let's drag the old logs.\
\
\\lx wodjwe\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de throw a log aside or bits of a log when chopping into it.\
\\xv .... wanjh ngarri-kolkme, arri-kolkme, arri-kolkme, arri-wodjwe, wanjh arri-barung wodjno\
arri-barung raitab arri-djuyme. Wanjh arri-baye, arri-baye arri-djuyme djohno.\
\\xe And then we chop and chop and throw bits of the tree away and we soak it all up all the way [honey\
into an fv:Acacia bark brush]. Then we suck on it and chew on the fv:Acacia bark brush.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx woh\
\\va wo\
\\ps interj.\
\\de yes\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I, E = yoh\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx -woh\
\\ps adv. pref.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge part.way.along\
\\re half way (adverbial prefix)\
\\re part way along\
\\de part way along\
\\xv Yi-wohdadje.\
\\xe Cut it in the middle.\
\\xv Kan-wohkurrme!\
\\xe Drop me off [from the truck] on the way [part way along your intended route].\
\\xv Karri-wohbawong.\
\\xe We left it half way.\
\\xv Ka-wohngeydi.\
\\xe It [the T-shirt] has a name [printed] on it half-way up.\
\\ee Bininj Kunwok speakers can sometimes translate this sense of fv:-woh as 'half way'\
\\sn 2\
\\ge in.process\
\\re whilst in midst of other action\
\\de an action or focus that occurs in the process of another action, along the way\
\\xv Bi-wohdadkaybom.\
\\xe He took the leg (of meat) off him (in the process of eating it).\
\\xv Wohmankang.\
\\xe It fell down half way (i.e. along a trajectory before it reached us).\
\\sn 3\
\\ge partially\
\\re partially\
\\re limitation in extent\
\\de partially, for the time being, temporarily, limitation in extent\
\\xv Nga-bendjalwohkan wurdurd.\
\\xe I'll take the children [watch over them] for the time being [until you return].\
\\xv Birri-wohkanjnguneng.\
\\xe They just ate some of the meat. (or alternatively) They ate their meat hurriedly.\
\\xv Ngarr-wohngerhme.\
\\xe Let's have a rest for a while.\
\\xv Kabene-wohni.\
\\xe They are both sitting there for a while.\
\\xv Yo djal namekke Wakmarranj-ken fi:open ka-djaldi money-ken nga-wohmang.\
\\xe Yes, the Wakmarranj area should be open [for mining exploration] so I can get a bit of money from it.\
\\dt 19/May/2007\
\\sn 4\
\\de not at all, not even a bit\
\\ng note that this sense is only instantiated with a negated transitive verb\
\\xv Barri-djalni marrek barri-wohbolknayi kured kayakki.\
\\xe They just sat there and weren't allowed to look around at all.\
\\uv W, I, Dj, Kdj\
\\ur E= yiyangbonj [external adverb, not prefixed]\
\
\\lx wohbelbme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de attached half way\
\\xv Ka-wohbelbme man-djirnerrinj.\
\\xe The mistletoe is attached halfway (up the tree).\
\\dt 25/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx wohkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de take temporarily 2. drive a vehicle for part of a distance\
\\xv Konda Manawukan nga-ben-djal-wohkan wurdurd.\
\\xe I'll take (teach) the kids for the time being here in Maningrida.\
\
\\lx wohme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de call out 'wo wo wo' (such as when being accidently burnt 'ouch').\
\
\\lx wohmi\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Ipomoea_graminea\
\\re fi:Ipomoea_velutina\
\\de Annual thin twining vine from perennial rootstock. Leaves: smooth, narrow, linear to linear-lanceolate tapering to base, blade 60-160 mm long x 2-12 mm wide, petiole 4-10 mm long. Flowers: large, white, tubular shaped, 50-100 mm long, on stalks to 18 mm long; opening during the night and closed during the day. The tuber is dug up, roasted, peeled and eaten.\
\\xv An-wohmi an-me bininj dja kornobolo.\
\\xe Both people and agile wallabies eat the (tuber of) fi:Ipomoea_graminea.\
\\xv An-wohmi manu an-me yiman ka-rohrok biddadda, an-kukyawuyahwurd.\
\\xe The fi:Ipomoea_graminea plant is edible with many little tubers like a potato, but much smaller.\
\\sc Ipomoea graminea, Ipomoea velutina\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ee In Kuninjku fv:man-wohmi refers only to the fv:yirridjdja moiety variety, the fv:duwa variety being fv:man-ngalinj.\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 18/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx wohnan\
\\va worhnan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de be awake, watchful observant, conscious\
\\xv Bulanj yi-worhnan?\
\\xe Bulanj are you awake?\
\\sn 2\
\\de be responsible or in charge\
\\xv Ngandi-marne-yimeng kun-red manih nguddangke bu yiman baleh ngarri-dowen wanjh\
nguddangke kun-red yi-worhnan.\
\\xe They said to me that this place belongs to me and that "if we should die, then you have to look after this\
place."\
\\sn 3\
\\de sighted (as opposed to blind)\
\\xv Mimdubbe, nomo ka-worhnan.\
\\xe He's blind, he can't see.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wohngorrk\
\\pr ku-\
\\ps loc. adv.\
\\ge half.way\
\\re half way\
\\de located half way on a body or landscape\
\\xv Ku-wohngorrk yi-bidbun ka-yo kun-rodjbe.\
\\xe Climbing half way up [the scree] there is red ochre there.\
\\dt 03/Jul/2011\
\
\\lx wohre\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de walk around on watch\
\\xv Karri-wohre karri-madbun kaluk wamuddjan kam-re.\
\\xe Let's wait around until wamuddjan comes.\
\
\\lx wohwirlire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de walk around\
\\xv A:Kamarrang makminj? B:Yoh, kamak ka-wohwirlire.\
\\xe Is Kamarrang feeling better? B:Yes, he's OK, he's up and about.\
\\xv Ya, la yimen kukak wanjh kam-bebme rumburre, ka-wohwirlire. Kaluk ngarrih-kele.\
\\xe Yes, because at night rumburre will appear and he wanders around. So, we're frightened.\
\
\\lx woh[CLAN NAME]minj\
\\pr na-, ngal-, al-, \'f8-\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr woh 'limitation in extent' - clan name [patriclan name]- minj 'past perfective of fv:-men theme verbs'\
\\ge adopted.by.clanX\
\\re adopted into a clan\
\\de adoption into another patriclan\
\\ng See also the entry for fv:-woh for examples illustrating the semantic range of this adverbial prefix.\
\\xv Bulanj nungka, Dangbarrawu na-badjan, wohbordohminj.\
\\xe He is Bulanj subsection, Dangbarrawu is his uncle and he was adopted into the Bordoh clan.\
\\ee Adoption into another fv:kun-mokurrkurr can occur when a child is an orphan or is given to be raised by another relative of the same\
patrimoiety. The person will then have dual clan affiliation.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so Imimbar Creek headwaters site survey (ELA 10229)\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx woh-[CLAN.NAME]-minj\
\\pr na-, ngal-, al-, \'f8-\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr woh '\
\\dt 18/May/2007\
\
\\lx wok\
\\lc kun-wok\
\\ps n.\
\\de language, word, message, story\
\\pdn kk = kun-darok.\
\
\\lx wokdahme\
\\va wok-dahmerrame\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de answer back to contradict, 'give cheek', argue back and forwards.\
\\xv Balang yun kan-wok-dahme.\
\\xe Balang, don't answer me back/contradict me.\
\
\\lx wok-dahmerrame\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de variant of fv:wok-dahme, answer back to contradict, 'give cheek', argue back and forwards.\
\
\\lx wokdi\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de speak, talk\
\\sn 2\
\\de make sound\
\\xv Mayh ka-wokdi.\
\\xe The ceremony will 'speak' (make sounds indicating it is about to commence at a particular location).\
\\pdn kk = -darokdi\
\
\\lx wokdurndiwe\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de answer back quickly 2.answer somebody in the language of the person addressing you\
\
\\lx wokkiyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lie making a noise\
\\xv Djaddi ka-wokkiyo. Bu man-djewk kabi-bun ka-wokdi "ngukwong ngukwong ngukwong".\
\\xe The frog lies making a noise. If rain disturbs him he says, "ngukwong ngukwong ngukwong".\
\
\\lx wokmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de record, normally with a cassette recorder\
\\xv Karri-wayini, karri-wokmarren.\
\\xe Let's record ourselves singing.\
\\xv Kano 'blenk kedjed' ba nga-ben-wokmang.\
\\xe Give me a blank cassette so I can record them.\
\\xv Kan-yaw-wok-mang.\
\\xe That little (microphone) records us.\
\\sn 2\
\\de answer\
\\xv Marrek ngun-wokmang, ngun-marnewokyak na-wuka.\
\\xe He can't answer you, he's gotta 'shut up' for you, your bunji.\
\
\\lx wokmidjbun\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge misidentify voice\
\\re fail to recognise a voice (e.g. on telephone)\
\\re misidentify a voice\
\\de Fail to recognise someone's voice when they speak. The most common context for\
this is telephone conversations.\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Ken, Balang ngudda, wokmidjbom.\
\\xe Oops, so it's you Balang, I didn't recognise your voice.\
\\dt 15/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx woknan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de call out to someone\
\\xv Nungka dolkkang djal-wam wok-yak. Minj kan-woknayinj ngadberre.\
\\xe He just got up and left without saying anything. He didn't call out to us.\
\\sn 2\
\\de Yell out to deceased ancestors on arrival at a particular site, particularly a sacred site.\
\\xv Ma ngabba yi-wokna!\
\\xe Ok Dad, call out to the ancestors!\
\
\\lx woknarren\
\\ps reflex. v.\
\\de call out to each other.\
\
\\lx wokyak\
\\ps adv.\
\\de quietly, silent\
\\xv Wurdurd baw, wok-yak!\
\\xe You kids quiet, don't talk.\
\\cf -marnewokyak\
\\ce be in silence relationship with someone\
\\xv Nangale yi-marnewokyak?\
\\xe Who are you in a silence relationship with?\
\
\\lx wokyimang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de snatch object from\
\\xv Kumekke kanjno kuyin-dolkkang wanjh bi-wok-kanj-yimey kun-kanj mey njolhmey\
kanjmey, bi-woh-dad-kaybom.\
\\xe Just as he was about to get up, he (emu) snatched the meat from right out of his mouth, took it and\
popped it into his mouth. He took half of the meat (kangaroo leg) off him.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wolbu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge lacewing\
\\re lacewing\
\\de various flying insects such as lacewings which fly at night and are attracted to light\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx wolerrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de female wallaroo or euro\
\\sc Macropus robustus\
\\pdn kk = ngal-warddardomrdi\
\
\\lx wolewoleh\
\\ps n.\
\\de yesterday, afternoon\
\\va wolewolehno, 'afternoon'\
\\xv wolewoleh buyika\
\\xe day before yesterday, days previous\
\\pdn kk = dabarraba\
\\cf wolewolehmeninj\
\\ce should be in the afternoon\
\\xv Ngarr-nayinj wolewolehmeninj ngarr-wokyi-bidbidbuyi.\
\\xe We should have alook in the afternoon, talking as we climb up (the words of fv:wayarra spirits as sung\
in a fv:wurrurrumi style song).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wolngwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cure bark with smoke to straighten it\
\\xv Yi-rak-ma nga-wolngwon dolobbo.\
\\xe Get firewood, I'm going to cure this bark.\
\
\\lx wolohme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de the 'snap' of a fish in water eating or chasing other fish\
\
\\lx womoro\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de pandanus which grows in open forest, as opposed to water pandanus or rock pandanus. This is a vegetation\
habitat term rather than an individual plant name.\
\\cf miwomohwomoro\
\\ce grove of open forest pandanus.\
\\dt 23/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx won\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de give\
\\xv Yi-wo.\
\\xe Give it to him/her\
\\xv Kan(w)o\
\\xe Give it to me.\
\\xv Wong.\
\\xe I gave you.\
\\ng fv:-won\} can be used as a verbalizing suffix with many adjectives eg. fv:-bulerriwon to blacken,\
fv:-kuyenwon\} to lengthen, fv:-rayekwon to tighten.\
\\uv W, I, Dj, Djnj\
\\ur E= -dadjung\
\\pdn kk = -weybun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx woning\
\\lc kun-woning\
\\ps n.\
\\de funeral ceremony\
\
\\lx wonghme\
\\ps formative in fv:mim-wonghme.\
\
\\lx wongkorr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de sacred dilly bag often woven with brightly coloured orange parrot feathers and/or strips of ceremonial cotton cloth.\
\\ee These are used in a number of public ceremonial contexts, the most common being fv:walk or 'young man' circumcision ceremonies where the initiates wear the bags on their bodies. During circumcision the boys bite into the bags as this is said to protect them from danger and pain.\
\\ee yirridjdja (the ones with long orange feather tassles).\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx wongwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make smoke, especially in smoking rituals when green ironwood leaves are burnt to produce smoke for\
ritual cleansing.\
\\st check this is not dolngwon\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wordword\
\\ps n.\
\\ge magpie-lark\
\\re Australian Magpie Lark\
\\re Magpie lark, peewee\
\\re peewee\
\\de Australian Magpie-lark\
\\sc Grallina cyanoleuca\
\\uv W\
\\ur I= marliblib\
\\sd bird\
\
\\lx Wordword\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge place_name\
\\re place north of Namokardabu\
\\de place near Yinaba billabong north of Namokardabu, totemic site or fv:djang for the magpie-lark fi:(Grallina_cyanoleuca).\
\\xv Wordword djang wirlarrk ka-barnhbarndi ku-bolkwern.\
\\xe At the magpie-lark dreaming place, there are (magpie-lark) eggs up in the trees everywhere.\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx worla\
\\ps n.\
\\de stone knife or axe\
\\pdn rarely used\
\\xv Bi-wayhkeng ku-berd da, ngalengman bi-wayhkeng ngal-yahwurdurd ku-keb worlah ben-bebbewayhkeng berrewoneng beneh-wam bene-kayhmiwam wanjh, "Yabok, yabok yeng nani yeng kan-wayhkeng wanjh ngarrku."\
\\xe That one on the tail, she lifted her up and also the younger sister on the head got lifted up, along with\
the axe, they were lifted and away they went, screaming as they went,"Sister, sister, it's a serpent that's\
lifted us both."\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx worlehyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Lie down, sleep.\
\\uv Kun-walidjaw clan lect\
\\ur Ordinary language= -yo\
\
\\lx worr\
\\pr man-, kun-\
\\va worrno\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable\
\\ng Either kun-worr or man-worr are acceptable in some dialects (e.g. Kundedjnjenghmi) although when incorporated into an adjectival construction the prefix is usually fv:(m)an- e.g. man-worrbuyika 'a different kind of leaf'\
\\ge leaves\
\\re leaf, leaves of any plant\
\\de Leaves.\
\\xv Na-kordang kun-worr bi-wodbom.\
\\xe The witch doctor hit him/her with leaves (to heal her).\
\\xv Yina ka-worrbaye duruk.\
\\xe Look that dog biting the leaves.\
\\cf kun-malaworr\
\\ce a branch of leaves (broken off and held in the hand)\
\\pdn kk = kun-worred\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 18/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx worrb\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge oh.my.dear\
\\re goodness me\
\\re oh my dear thing\
\\re 'how sad'\
\\de Interjection expressing sadness or sympathy.\
\\xv Ngarduk kokok worrb kabini-burren worrb.\
\\xe My older brother oh no how terrible, the two of them [the brother and a crocodile] were fighting, how sad.\
\\uv E\
\\ur I, W= worro\
\\dt 13/Sep/2014\
\
\\lx worrbayhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de appear, come out, arrive\
\\pde -bebme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx worred\
\\pr kun-\
\\lc kun-worred\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de leaves\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde kun-worr, kun-malaworr.\
\\dt 15/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx worred\
\\pr (m)an-\
\\lc (m)an-worred\
\\ps n.\
\\de tea leaf\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde dilib\
\\dt 15/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx worrh\
\\lc man-worrh\
\\ps n.\
\\de food\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-me\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx worrhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de make a fire, create a blaze\
\\xv Yi-worrhmen karri-nan birlino.\
\\xe Make a fire and we'll see the flame.\
\
\\lx worrhworr\
\\ng formative in fv:marne-worrhworr\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx worrk\
\\lc kun-worrk\
\\ps n.\
\\de satiation, the condition of being full.\
\
\\lx worrkkorl\
\\ps n.\
\\de water which is found lying in depressions on rock surfaces after rain and has a distinctive red colour\
from either chemicals in the rock or from rotting vegetation.\
\\xv Worrkkorl 'red one', kun-wardde ka-bun kamarnbun 'red'.\
\\xe Water lying in rock depressions after rain is red from the rock producing a red colour.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx worrkmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de eat one's fill, fill up with food\
\\xv Man-me yi-djare? Bonj nga-worrkminj.\
\\xe Do you want food? No, it's OK I'm full.\
\\pdn kk = dekme\
\
\\lx worrkodj\
\\pr man-, kun-\
\\va worrkodjno\
\\ge tree.crown\
\\re tree crown\
\\re leaves at top of tree\
\\de Leaves at the top of a tree, crown of tree; high branches.\
\\xv Barri-djalbidbuni kuworrkodj duninj, kaddum duninj ku-worrkodj, kumeke barri-bunbuni yawurrinj.\
\\xe They just had to climb right up into the high branches, right at the top, and there the young men had to stop. [Kundjeyhmi]\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx Worrkorl\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a now extinct fi:duwa moiety patriclan in the middle East Alligator River district in Western Arnhem Land close to the Kakadu\
National Park border\
\\xv Nawarray darnki kane-balwam. Wanjh manekke kabbal mane ngarr-djowkkeng and koyek, Worrkorl bukka bedberre. \
\\xe We went close to the site Nawarray. Then we crossed that billabong and to the east of there it is Worrkorl clan country.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx worrkuyengkuyeng\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge long.leaved\
\\re long leaved\
\\de (of plants) having elongated or lanceolate leaves\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 18/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx worro\
\\ps interj.\
\\ge oh.my.dear\
\\re goodness\
\\re 'oh my dear thing'\
\\re how sad\
\\de an interjection expressing sadness or sympathy\
\\xv Bininj-yak, worro, ka-warre!\
\\xe There are no people [here in this country anymore], how sad, it's a terrible thing!\
\\xv Kaldjdjinawangane kumekke birri-bokkabokkang kumekke ruruy fs:my_uncle worro. Na-Kurlarama, kumekke djal\
ruy.\
\\xe At Kaldjdjinawangane they were tracking game and it was there that my uncle was burned [in a fire drive accident], so sad. That\
Kularama clansman, he was burnt at that place.\
\\sy awurd\
\\uv W, I\
\\ur E= worrb\
\\dt 01/May/2007\
\
\\lx worrokolung\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go up, over and down the other side eg. a ball going over a net.\
\
\\lx worromkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re stagger\
\\de Stagger.\
\\xv Ka-drangkme ka-worroworromkan.\
\\xe He's drunk and staggering.\
\\uv I, W\
\\ur Kdj= worrumkan\
\\se kodjworromkan\
\\de Have a fit, seizure.\
\\dt 27/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx worrowkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de jump, skip or hop up and down (reduplication denotes repetitive action eg. fv:-worrowkworrowkme.\
\\xv Kunj ka-worrowkworrowkme.\
\\xe Kangaroos hop.\
\\sy dohdolkkan\
\
\\lx worrowme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sd plant\
\\de new shoots starting to grow on a plant\
\
\\lx worrre\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de tumble down, fall down some distance\
\\xv Bidwohbidworrwam djikirrh bi-karrmeng beneh-burrinj.\
\\xe His hands grabbed (fell down) him and they both fought.\
\\dv ka-mankan.\
\\xv Kaddum barri-dulknani ka-worr-re.\
\\xe They would watch the tree come falling down.\
\\xv Manekke aeroplane ka-worrre.\
\\xe That plane there flying along.\
\
\\lx wowme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de yell out in pain 'wow', 'wow'\
\\xv Birri-bekkang kah-wowme kure kaddum.\
\\xe They heard him call out 'wow' from up the top.\
\
\\lx woworhme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de fan (use a fan)\
\\xv Kan-woworhmen nga-yo.\
\\xe Fan me, I'm going to go to sleep.\
\
\\lx woybukki\
\\ps\
\\de true, really!\
\\cf kun-woybuk\
\\ce truth\
\
\\lx woybukwon\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de tell the truth\
\
\\lx woyime\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re feel effects of cold weather\
\\de Feel the discomfort of cold, cause to feel cold.\
\\xv 'mibiruk mibiruk kawolhborrombi' [morrdjdjanjno song text] ... Djibowkmanj mibiruk ka-ni anbu kun-wardde yi-bengkan an-biruk. 'Kawolhborrombi' kune ka-yime kun-bonjdjek kabi-woyime. Ka-ni ku-wardde kun-bonjdjek, mibiruk kuwarddedubbe.\
\\xe 'mibiruk mibiruk kawolhborrombi' [the text of a fv:morrdjdjanjno song]... The black wallaroo Djibowkmanj [mythological name] sits in the rock, you know, near the fi:Blepharocarya_depauperata trees. The song word fv:ka-wolhborrombi means that the kangaroo is feeling the cold and is taking shelter. She sits in the rock to escape the cold, in the grove of fi:Blepharocarya_depauperata trees, deep in the crevices of rock.\
\\dt 27/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx wubarr\
\\va ubar\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremony name (no longer practised)\
\
\\lx wubbunj\
\\va kubbunj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge canoe\
\\re canoe\
\\de Dugout canoe.\
\\xv Wubbunj yoh, na-kohbanj kayhmeng en birri-yimeng yimarnek wubbunj dingihdi dja bobidbom en nganedorrorrokeng nganemkang. Yo, wanjh malahmalayi nganeyawam kubbunj.\
\\xe A canoe, yes, the old man would call out and the canoe was supposed to stay there but the tide came in and we dragged it up, we both took it [up onto the higher beach]. Yes, then the next day, we looked for the canoe [but couldn't find it].\
\\et The form suggests it is a Mayali word, with the etymology gu-bunj 'in-hollow (as bamboo)'. Note that the form fv:kukbunj has also been recorded. If this is correct the meaning would be 'body-hollow (as bamboo)'.\
\\sd material culture\
\\dt 12/Jul/2013\
\
\\lx wud\
\\ps n. insects\
\\de earth worm\
\
\\lx Wurdanke\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate which is the site of a fresh water spring.\
\\ee Kun-ngad kumekke.\
\\xe There's a spring there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wuka\
\\lc na-wuka\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. 1.my brother, your brother-in-law, we call each other fv:makka. 2.my fv:kakkak,\
your brother-in-law, you and I call each other fv:mamamh. 3.My father, your brother-in-law, you are my\
uncle. 4.My brother-in-law (second choice), your fv:kakkali or brother-in-law, you are my fv:kakkak.\
\\cn na-kobengngani.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wuka\
\\lc ngalwuka\
\\cf see fv:ngaluka\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wukme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de swallow\
\
\\lx wularla\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de spectacled hare-wallaby\
\\sc Lagorchestes conspicillatus\
\\xv Wularla ka-kayhmire ka-yime kaaaay, kunekke.\
\\xe The Spectacled hare wallaby goes along calling out, it says, 'kaaaay' like that.\
\\xv Wularla Yabburdurrwa ken.\
\\xe The Spectacled hare wallaby is associated with the Yabburdurrwa ceremony.\
\\ee This species is rare in Arnhem Land.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wulamerrh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge quail.spp\
\\re quail spp.\
\\de Various species of quail; chestnut-backed button quail, red-chested quail and the red-backed button quail\
\\sc Turnix castanota, Turnix pyrrhothorax, Turnix maculosa\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur W, Kdj= djirndih, I= mehme, E= merhmerh\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 08/Jan/2009\
\
\\lx wularr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of plant\
\\sc Dysoxylum acutangulum\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx wularri\
\\va kularri\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de wind which blows from the west\
\\xv Murnubbarr ka-rrabukurrme wanjh wularri ka-kurrabun.\
\\xe The magpie geese lay their eggs at the time when the fv:wularri wind is blowing.\
\\dt 04/Jul/2006\
\
\\lx Wularri Djang\uc0\u8232 \\cf See fv:Kularri_Djang\
\
\\lx Wulkku\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx wululuhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge ignite\
\\re light fire (fi:kun-kurrng register)\
\\de light a fire, set fire to\
\\xv Yi-bidjirrbonghmen yi-wululuhke kun-mimal.\
\\xe Yi-burdebmen yi-wurlhke kun-rak.\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde wurlhke\
\\sd fire\
\\dt 30/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx wulululhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de burn off\
\\pde wurlhke\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx wulululhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de burn\
\\pde ka-rung kun-rak, wurlhme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx wulumu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of sorghum grass ('spear grass') which is classified by patrimoiety as fv:yirridjdja and dries out and falls\
down before the fv:mardadubba sorghum grass of fv:duwa moiety.\
\\dt 23/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx wumbu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de Phascogale\
\\sc Phascogale pirata\
\\sy weng\
\\ph [we:ng]\
\\uv Kune\
\\nt I do not yet have a Kuninjku name for Phascogale.\
\
\\lx Wunkomko\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge clan.n\
\\re clan name\
\\de Clan name or fv:kunmokurrkurr associated with area on Upper East Alligator to Upper Katherine River.\
\\sd clan\
\\dt 28/Oct/2012\
\
\\lx wunwunbu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de dark morph of fv:karrkkanj the brown falcon\
\\sc Falco berigora\
\\xv Kakukbame kanmilanmila kodjok, ngudda kurduk bulanj *wunwunbu.*\
\\xe The light morph of the brown falcon is called fv:kanmilanmila but you Bulanj are the dark morph,\
fv:wunwunbu.\
\\ee The brown falcon is an important totem in the fv:lorrkkon hollow log ossuary ceremony. The dark morph fv:wunwunbu belongs to men of the fv:bulanj subsection and is also called fv:bambidj. Public songs are performed in the camp for a number of nights and then the men and young initiates retire to a secret camp on the final few nights of the ceremony. One public song in the fv:lorrkkon ceremony based on the dark morph of the brown falcon as its subject, has the following text: Bambidj korna, bambidjko, yawanjh korna yawanjhko\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx wungme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de smoke tobacco\
\\xv Kano kalarru nga-wungme.\
\\xe Give me a cigarette and I'll have a smoke.\
\\pdn kk = -mimalawme\
\
\\lx wurdihke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de lose OBJ., cause to become lost.\
\
\\lx wurdihme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become lost, lose ones way\
\\xv Nga-djal-yawam bonj wurdihmeng.\
\\xe I kept looking for it, but it was lost.\
\\xv Nga-wurdihme ngudberre.\
\\xe I'll go and get lost from all of you.\
\
\\lx wurdngarrku\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\sn 1\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my sister-in-law ie. fv:kanjok, your auntie ie. fv:berlu, we call each other\
fv:kakkak.\
\\cn berlu.\
\\sn 2\
\\de kun-rderbi kin term eg. my sibling your child, I call you mother.\
\\cn na-djakerr/ngal-djakerr or if older sibling, na-kokok/ngal-yabok.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wurdurd\
\\ps n.\
\\de children\
\\pl wurduhwurdurd\
\\pdn kk = manjamanjakku\
\
\\lx Wurdurdkukyoy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate with rock art sites.\
\\xv Wurdurdkukyoy kanjdji Kudjaldordo la kaddum.\
\\xe Wurdurdkukyoy is the upstream part of lower Kudjaldordo creek.\
\
\\lx wurdyahwurdyahwurd\
\\lc noun classwurdyahwurdyahwurd\
\\ps adj.\
\\de small ones (plural)\
\\xv Kun-red-wurdyahwuryahwurd.\
\\xe All the small places.\
\
\\lx wurdyaw\
\\ps n.\
\\de child\
\
\\lx wurlam\
\\lc na-wurlam\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de Willi-willi wind\
\\dv Kun-kurra ka-bidjibbidjibme.\
\\sy bidj\uc0\u729 rru\
\\uv W =na-djardawo.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wurlebke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de take someone to swim (eg. wash a baby)\
\
\\lx wurlebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de take a bath or shower 2.ceremonial funeral shower\
\\pdn kk = -ngarlabme\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx wurlhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de set fire, ignite, start a bush fire\
\\sn 2\
\\de switch an electric light on.\
\
\\lx wurlhkerren\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de get dressed\
\\sy djongburren\
\
\\lx wurlhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de burn, catch fire\
\\xv Balekeno ka-wokdi mayh? Kaluk ka-wurluwurlhme karri-wareyo\
\\xe When will the ceremony happen? After when it's burning off time, then we'll go and enter the\
ceremony.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Wurlkwurlkbald\'9cng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx wurluwurlhme\
\\lc ka-wurluwurlhme\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de season name, the time during fv:yekke or dry season when fires are lit for hunting drives.\
\
\\lx Wurningak\
\\ps n.\
\\de language name fv:Urningangk.\
\
\\lx Wurnkomku\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a patriclan associated with the southern Arnhem Land plateau and headwaters of the East Alligator and Katherine Rivers\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx wunnguk\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Jacksonia.dilatata\
\\re fi:Jacksonia_dilatata\
\\de kind of small blueish to grey-green tree/shrub (2-4m) with yellow flowers in late dry season\
\\sc Jacksonia dilatata\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\ur Kdj= an-kurndilinj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 18/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx wurikbun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de lose weight (of people or animals), become thin.\
\
\\lx wurr\
\\lc kun-wurr\
\\ps n.\
\\de diarrhoea\
\\xv Kun-wurr nga-rrowen.\
\\xe I've got diarrhoea.\
\
\\lx Wurralele\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate.name\
\\re estate name\
\\de Estate name in the upper Cadell River region.\
\\sd estate\
\\dt 12/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Wurrbbarn\
\\va Wurrbbarnbulu\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:yirridjdja moiety patriclan on the south-east Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Nakka mahkih nawu nungan, Wurrbbarnbulu-ngong bedberre Badkorol.\
\\xe That clan now, the Wurrbbarnbulu people own the estate called Badkorol.\
\\xv Ngurrurdu Bulanjdjan ngal-Wurrbbarn. Ngal-yikbakkarda bu ngal-Burnungku.\
\\xe The emu was Bulanjdjan subsection and Wurrbbarn clan.  She is associated with a clan confederation called Bakkarda [which includes\
Kardbam clan] as well as Burnungku clan.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Wurrbbarn\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Named section of the escarpment line north of Bomarranj on the western side of the Goomadeer, north-west section of the Kabbari complex. The escarpment section is around a kilometre long and faces northeast. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx wurrbbarn\
\\ps n.\
\\de emu\
\\sc Dromaius novaehollandiae\
\\uv Kune\
\\ee Rem = wurrbbarn\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Wurrbbarnbulu\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de variant name of the Wurrbbarn clan.\
\\xv Wurrbbarnbulu kaddum, Bakkarda kanjdji.\
\\xe Wurrbbarnbulu is upland and the Bakkarda [yikurrumu] clan estate is lowland [i.e. further downstream in the drainage basin].\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx wurrbbu\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Drypetes.lasiogyna\
\\re fi:Drypetes_lasiogyna\
\\de kind of tree generally 5-10m which grows in monsoon vine thickets near permanent water\
\\xv An-wurrbbu arri-dame ka-manjmakmen.\
\\xe We use fi:Drypetes_lasiogyna (leaves) as a cooking herb to improve the flavour of food.\
\\xv Ngarre mi-wurrbbu ngarr-ni, ngarre mi-wurrbbu ngarr-ni, ngarre mi-wurrbbu ngarr-ni, ngarre mi-wurrbbu ngarr-ni\
ka-wolewolehmen ngarr-wokyibidbidbun.\
\\xe Let's both go to the fi:Drypetes_lasiogyna thicket and stay there [repeated] As it becomes afternoon, our voices will echo (this is the\
text of a fv:kun-borrk genre song by songman Kevin Djimarr).\
\\sc Drypetes lasiogyna\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\ur I (syn.)= djirdu\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 18/Sep/2007\
\
\\lx wurrben\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Lophostemon.lactifluus\
\\re fi:Lophostemon_lactifluus\
\\de Swamp mahogany, a tree 7-10m with soft flakey bark, often growing together with Melaleucas next to permanent or intermittent water.\
\\xv Ka-karlkidmang bu karlkidno an-dadjek an-burluddak. an-balanjdjafs:all_that, an-birrbbirr yi-nan an-birrbbirr, ... o\
an-darl, o an-murlmu, an-wern, an-yilinjbirrk, an-yilinjbirrk dje ka-rri... dja an-wurrben ka-mang.\
\\xe They [honey bees] get nectar from fi:Grevillea_pteridifolia and stringy bark trees, woollybutt and all of those, verticordia, calytrix, you\
see these verticordias or fi:Melaleuca_leucadendra, there are too many to name, fi:Xanthostemon_eucalyptoides, there's one of those\
trees standing there... or it gets it from fi:Lophostemon_lactifluus.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Lophostemon lactifluus\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, I\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx wurrbonghke\
\\ps v.t\
\\pdv kk\
\\de cause to rumble, start an engine or machine\
\\pde wurrke\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx wurrbu\
\\ps n.\
\\de Mangrove sp.\
\\sc Bruguiera gymnorhiza\
\\uv E\
\\sy yirrikkarl\
\
\\lx man-wurrbula\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de Leichhardt tree.\
\\sc Nauclea orientalis\
\\uv E\
\\ur I = man-njalbbuwa, W= man-marrewahwa, Kdj= an-marrewahwah, an-kunkun\
\\sn 2\
\\de River she-oak.\
\\sc Casuarina cunninghamiana\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wurrhkayhkoh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of perrenial spear grass\
\\xv Wurrhkayhkoh ankung karrahkendong.\
\\xe The fi:Sorghum_plumosum is a honey plant i.e. bees collect pollen from it.\
\\sc Sorghum plumosum\
\\ee yirridjdja ?\
\\sy wurrhwayoh\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= ngarddjarr\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wurrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\re trick, play a joke\
\\re deceive\
\\de Deceive, trick, play a joke on.\
\\dt 29/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx wurrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de Pretend to be.\
\\xv Yimanek kunj, wurrhmeng namung.\
\\xe The taipan pretended to be a kangaroo.\
\\uv I, E\
\\dt 29/Jun/2014\
\
\\lx wurrhwayoh\
\\va wurrhkayhkoh\
\\ph\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass sp.\
\\re Sorghum sp.\
\\de kind of sorghum grass which does not flower until late fv:kudjewk, early fv:bangkerreng\
\\sy wurrhkayhkoh\
\\sc Sorghum plumosum\
\\dt 25/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx wurridmirri\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de look around for a sexual partner\
\
\\lx Wurrik\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a fi:duwa moiety patriclan\
\\xv Ngalengman kanjdji manekke ngamed Wurrudakdjurle, Djalendjurle kabalkolung Marrawana kanjdji Mimarrewahwa,\
Mikorromolod kabale kanjdji makkan na-Wurrik ngalengman, kunyed, na-Wurrik kunyed kunu.\
\\xe And downstream to Wurrudakdjurle and Djalendjurle and Marrawana and down to Mimarrewahwa and on to Mikorromolod and\
continue on to the Wurrik clan land, places in the Wurrik caln estate.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx wurrk\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ng incorporable\
\\sn 1\
\\ge bushfire\
\\re bushfire\
\\de bushfire, bushfire used to hunt game (especially kangaroos)\
\\xv Minj ngarri-rayi wurrk dorrengh wardi ngarri-ruyi.\
\\xe We wouldn't move along with the blaze otherwise we'd get burnt.\
\\xv Kure Bangardi ba-ru-y Kordoberr. Na-Marrirn, ruy man-wurrk. \
\\xe The place Mibarlwarra is downstream from there. That's where Bangardi got burnt, at Kordoberr. A Marrirn clan man, got burnt in a\
fire (drive)\
\\xv Man-wurrk-kah birri-duhdulubom kunj yo. Ngarri-karrmeng man-kole nawu, bolkkime rifle.\
\\xe They used to spear kangaroos in the midst of the fire. We had spears then but today we have rifles.\
\\xv Birri-wurlhkeyi bu an-wurrk birri-nami, kunj bu kunj birri-yami namekke.\
\\xe They used to burn off [the country], lighting fires to spear kangaroos, that's what they did.\
\\sd fire\
\\pdv kun-djanud ka-wulululhme\
\\so Kalarriya\
\\dt 20/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx wurrkabal\
\\va kurrkabal\
\\ps n.\
\\ge longtom\
\\re freshwater longtom\
\\re fi:Strongylura_kreffti\
\\de Freshwater long-tom.\
\\sc Strongylura kreffti\
\\ur I= karlerrh, Kdj= burrukulung\
\\ee duwa moiety\
\\sd fish\
\\dt 20/Nov/2008\
\
\\lx Wurrkbaba\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Jawoyn patriclan on the southern Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Na-kare nakka arri-bawoni nganngarradjngoro kumekke kun-red maitbi Balang bimbom bad bu na-buyhmiken\
bedberre nakkan, walem nungan na-Djawonj nuye en Dangbon rayek, Dangbonkerlk, Djawonj-kerlk Djawonj-yirayek,\
jed bu ka-re kure Buladjang yoh. Madjbaba, Wurrkbaba nuye really Wurrkbaba nuye, Bula nawu djang. yirridjdja\
nakka.\
\\xe A long time ago we left that place of the Nganngarradjngoro spirit story there which maybe Balang painted [in the rock] but that was in\
the Buyhmi clan's territory there in the south in Jawoyn country and also the two dialects of Dangbon, hard and soft dialects and also\
hard and soft Jawoyn up there as far as Bula Djang, yeah. Madjbaba country, but really Wurrkbaba clan land, that Bula dreaming place\
and fi:yirridjdja moiety.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx wurrkdjelk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge grass.sp.\
\\re grass species\
\\re fi:Ectrosia_leporina\
\\de Perennial grass species with distinctive reddish inflorescences of often densely packed spikelets.\
\\sc Ectrosia leporina\
\\uv Kdj\
\\dt 16/Feb/2014\
\
\\lx wurrke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cause to rumble, start an engine or machine\
\\pdn kk = -wurrbonghke\
\
\\lx wurrkeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de season name, latter part of the dry season, hot weather, fires abound.\
\\xv Wurrkeng-ko man-burluddak ka-kobun, man-kung karri-ngun, ka-wurluwurlhme.\
\\xe In fv:Wurrkeng season the Stringybark trees flower, we get honey and it's the time when all the\
bushfires burn.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Wurrkku\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re fi:yikurrumu ritualistic clan name\
\\de one of the fi:yikurrumu ritualistic names for the Kurulk clan, others being fv:Marnayemarra and fv:Kandadjdja\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx wurrkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de stun, concuss\
\\xv Dowkkeng mako ngan-kodj-wurrkmeng.\
\\xe He fired the gun and it (the noise) stunned me.\
\
\\lx wurrkname\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr wurrk 'fire' name 'put'\
\\ge light.fire\
\\re light fire\
\\de set fire, light fires for a fire drive (to hunt kangaroos)\
\\sd fire\
\\dt 20/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx wurrkurduk\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Demansia_atra\
\\de Black whip snake\
\\xv Mayh, namung, wurrkurduk, nawu namung. Ngeybokenh. Bu ngaye ngayime wurrkurduk bedda kabarriyime namung. Nabang kanbaye, fi:nomo_really ngarrdowen.\
\\xe That snake, the black whip snake. It has two names fv:namung and fv:wurrkurduk. I call it wurrkurduk [in Kundedjnjenghmi] and others call it fv:namung. It is aggressive and can bite us, but we don't die, it's only mildly venomous.\
\\sc Demansia atra\
\\ee Black snake with red tail\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= berdkurlba, Kdj= djenbedjek, namu, W= namung\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wurrlele\
\\pref\
\\va wurralele\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge estate_name\
\\re estate name\
\\de name of an estate or regional 'big name' for an area in the north-east of the Arnhem Land plateau\
\\xv Wurrlele ngadberre, ka-djalkadjurren raworrinj Waridjngu Wurrbbarn djal raworrinj. Yiman na-Djordi djalraworrinj\
na-Madjdjalum raworrinj. \
\\xe Wurrlele belongs to us (Wurrbbarn clan), we share it joined with the Waridjngu and Wurrbbarn. Just like the Djordi and Madjdjalum\
join and share estates together.\
\\dt 17/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx wurrmarninj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Red Lily\
\\sc Nelumba nucifera\
\\ee yirridjdja/ Yabburdurrwa\
\\ee Kun-kardbam djang (dreaming). It is said that if the flowers of this plant are picked where they grow at\
the sacred site in fv:na-kardbam country, a severe cyclone will appear or similar such tempest.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx wurrmarninj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de red lily\
\\xv Wurrmarninj karri Wulk darnki Kunbarlanja.\
\\xe The Nelumba red lily grows at Wulk near Kunbarlanja.\
\\sc Nelumba nucifera\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= anmarrewahwa\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx wurrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de rumbles\
\\xv Kam-wurrme muddikang.\
\\xe The car is coming (rumbling hither).\
\\cf Kun-wurr.\
\\ce Diarrhoea\
\\cf Nga-wurrbabang.\
\\ce I've got a pain in the stomach (rumble rumble)\
\\cf -wurrke\
\\ce start the engine (cause to rumble)\
\
\\lx Wurrmindabba\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in East Alligator River region\
\\de Site on the upper East Alligator River, about 45km southeast (upstream) of Cahill's Crossing. Wurrmindabba is a few kilometres downstream from Kundjalerri Kayo.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx wurrmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go along rumbling, the running of an engine\
\\xv Ka-wurrke, yi-bo-rrahkendo ka-wurrmire.\
\\xe He'll start it up (the engine) and you fill it with water (radiator) while the engine is running.\
\
\\lx wurrmirri\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de stand\
\\xv Nanih Kamarrang ka-wurrmirri.\
\\xe That's Kamarrang standing there.\
\
\\lx wurrngalk\
\\ps n.\
\\de young men, teenagers\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde yawurrinj\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx wurrngiyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de crouch down to drink water\
\\xv Nga-wurrngiyo ba nga-bo-ngun.\
\\xe I'll get down and have a drink.\
\
\\lx Wurrubik\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Hill around 5km due south of the Djurlka waterfall. The hill is located at the estate boundaries of Kudjekbinj (northeast), Kunukdi (south/southeast) and Djurlka (north/northwest). \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx Wurrudjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de fv:Kun-djak sickness dreaming on Croker Island. One of the places visited by the fv:Na-korrkko\
ancestors dring their travels.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx wurrun\
\\nt check wurrurn?\
\\pr kun-\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial shade shelter where people sit during the day making preparations for ceremonial rituals.\
\
\\lx wurrurrumi\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sn 1\
\\de monsoon forest vine with aerial roots\
\\sc Tinospora smilacina\
\\sn 2\
\\de song style associated with the mamurrng and fv:walk or fv:djabbi ceremony.\
During the Kuninjku mamurrng ceremony a long rope representing the 'wurrurrumi'\
vine is used in the dancing. Today one of the chief exponents of this song style is\
Kevin Djimarr. \
\\uv Kdj= an-kukdenge\
\\dt 08/Aug/2005\
\
\\lx wuybbinj\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\de Honey, sugar bag (generic).\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-kung\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Wuyhkabambuldi\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Along with Muddum part of the Wurdyaw Djang \'91Baby Dreaming\'92 complex about a kilometre south of Kudjekbinj outstation. The focus is a pandanus grove on either side of the creek here, which is a restricted place. People wanting to conceive will call out to the baby spritis of this place. There is an area of flat rock here.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx ya\
\\ps interj.\
\\de Yes, that's the way.\
\
\\lx ya-\
\\ps loc. pref.\
\\ge towards\
\\re towards (prefix on compass directional)\
\\de locative prefix on a compass directional\
\\xv Man-dulum karri-balbolknan ya-koyek.\
\\xe A mountain we can see in the east.\
\\sy berre-\
\\dt 03/Jul/2011\
\
\\lx Yabburdurrwa\
\\ps n.\
\\sd ceremony\
\\de major regional secret cult ceremony associated with yirridjdja moiety.\
\
\\lx yabok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg., My sister, your niece, you are my uncle.\
\\cn ngal-yabok.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yabok\
\\lc ngal-yabok\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg., my fv:ngal-kurrng, your sister, we are cousins ie.fv:na-kurrng.\
\
\\lx yabokwarre\
\\lc ngal-yabokwarre\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de kun-derbi kin term, eg. my wife, your sister, you and I are brothers-in-law.\
\
\\lx yad\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\de freshwater prawn\
\\pdn kk = ngalkayedyed\
\\uv Kune= wakih\
\\ee REM = wakih\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yahme\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge crumble\
\\re crumble\
\\de crumble, not stick together or gel\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng\
\\xv Birdi anbu bobbidj-ken anwarre, ka-yahme.\
\\xe The cerumen from fv:bobbidj honey hives is no good, it crumbles.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yahwurd\
\\ps adj.\
\\de small\
\\ng sometimes does not take prefix\
\\xv Na-yaw-kimuk nawu namarnkorl. Nakka namindjibuk yahwurd.\
\\xe The 'namarnkorl' are the larger juveniles. The small ones are called 'naminjdjibuk'.\
\
\\lx yahwurd\
\\lc man-yahwurd\
\\ps adj.\
\\de a little, a bit\
\\xv Kano man-yahwurd.\
\\xe Give me a little bit.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx yahyay\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge acacia.spp\
\\re acacia branches\
\\re dry acacia (and other) branches \
\\de generic term for the dead branches of various small woody shrubs and trees, especially acacias, which are used as kindling\
\\xv Kumekke an-djumbak, an-yahyay, an-yahyay an-buk, ya an-dadjek, an-winjhwinj an-bu an-warddeken yiman\
an-dadjek an-winjhwinj.\
\\xe There [in the rock country] are fi:Calytrix brownii, various acacia shrubs with branches that dry out, yeah and fi:Grevillea_pteridifolia,\
fi:Grevillea dryandri, that is a rock country grevillea that resembles fi:Grevillea_pteridifolia, [but is called] fi:Grevillea dryandri.\
\\uv Djnj= an-yahyay\
\\uv I,W,E= man-yahyay\
\\sn 2\
\\ge Boronia.grandisepala\
\\re fi:Boronia_grandisepala\
\\de kind of erect multi-stemmed shrub (up to 0.5m)\
\\sc Boronia grandisepala\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yakarrburren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fall down onto the ground\
\\dv Ka-warrwarrhme ku-kurlk.\
\\xv Ngam-re nga-djurludjurlhme ngurri-yakarrburren.\
\\xe I'll come and ram a stick up the hole and you'll all fall down (words to a fv:wurrurrumi style song).\
\
\\lx Yakidyakid\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Kunwinjku patriclan\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\
\\lx yakidjme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de spear\
\\pde danjbun\
\\xv Djerrkudmiken kabirri-yi-dokan kabirri-yakidjme molarrinj.\
\\pde Barrawu kabirri-yi-re kabirri-danjbun kunj.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yakirrdjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de milkwood\
\\sc Alstonia actinophylla\
\
\\lx yakkirrdjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de milkwood tree\
\\sc Alstonia actinophylla\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= an-djenjdjok\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yakmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become depleted, finish, exhaust, end\
\\xv Karri-madbun kaluk man-djewk ka-yakmen.\
\\xe Let's wait until the rain has finished.\
\\xv Ngarri-djuhke manekke man-yawok kaluk bangno ka-yakmen.\
\\xe We put that cheeky yam into the water until the poison is all gone.\
\\pdn kk = yakoramen\
\
\\lx yakminj\
\\cf yakmen\
\\de finished, all gone, completed\
\\pdn kk = yakoraminj\
\\cf see fv:-yakmen\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yakngarra\
\\pr an-\
\\va kun-yakngarra\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Pandanus.spiralis\
\\re fi:Pandanus_spiralis\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of common pandanus tree\
\\xv An-yakngarra kan-derrme.\
\\xe The pandanus (leaf) spikes us.\
\\xv Ka-bolkkabbal an-yakngarra ka-mirnderri.\
\\xe Extensive pandanus forest on flat country.\
\\sc Pandanus spiralis\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj\
\\ur I, E= kun-dayarr, W= man-belk\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yakoramen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become depleted\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde yakmen\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx yakoraweybun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de finish\
\\pde yakwon\
\\xv Birri-yakora-weyburrinj.\
\\pde Birri-yakkorrinj.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yakwan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de eat\
\\pde ngun\
\\xv Mandi yi-yakwan la na-njeknjek.\
\\pde Yun yi-ngun la na-djamun.\
\\xe Don't eat that, it's taboo/sacred.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yakwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de finish something\
\\ng sometimes Kuninjku say fv:-yakkong\} for fv:yakwong\
\\xv Manme yi-karrme? Kayakki, birri-yakwong birri-dedjwarla.\
\\xe Have you got any food? No, those greedy guts (obscene) finished it all.\
\\pdn kk = yakoraweybun\
\
\\lx Yakyak\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\uv E, Kun-dedjnjenghmi\
\\ee from fv:yawkyawk (DK)\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yakyak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de Sprangled Drongo\
\\sc Dicrurus bracteatus\
\\uv Kune\
\
\\lx Yalama\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de the Iwaidja and Mawng pronunciation/version of the clan name fv:Djalama\
\\xv fi:But_that_same, Kunmarung ngarri-yime Yalama, bad Kunwinjku kabirri-yime Djalama.\
\\xe But it's the same, in Mawng we say 'Yalama' but in Kunwinjku they say 'Djalama'.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx yalang\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge naked\
\\re naked\
\\de Naked.\
\\xv Kun-madjyak yalang ngarri-rayi.\
\\xe We had no clothes and went about naked.\
\\uv E\
\\ur I, W= lahlarrk, dedjlahlarrk\
\
\\lx yarlang\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de termites\
\
\\lx yalarrke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cause to disperse, spread out things\
\
\\lx yalarrwanjwanj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge fern.sp.\
\\re fern fi:sp.\
\\re fi:Blechnum_orientale\
\\de fern which grows in jungles\
\\sd plant\
\\uv I, E\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx yalk\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\va an-badyalk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge honey.type\
\\re honey variety found in rocks\
\\re fi:Austroplebeia_essingtonii\
\\re fi:Tetragonula_mellipes\
\\de A variety of honey found in rocks and the stingless bee species that produce it. Two different species of bees have been identified making hives in rocks suggesting the name refers collectively to species that build their hives in rocks.\
\\xv Ku-wardde kah-ni man-yalk, kuwarddeken. Ku-wardde man-yalk.\
\\xe The fv:man-yalk honey bees live in the rocks. fv:Man-yalk is rock honey.\
\\cf An-yalk kebkuyeng.\
\\ce Long-nosed honey-bees which make their hives in rock crevices.\
\\cf An-yalk kebyahwurd\
\\ce Short-nosed honey-bees which make their hives in rock crevices.\
\\sc Austroplebeia essingtonii, Tetragonula mellipes\
\\uv Djnj, I, E, W\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yalk kebkuyeng\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bee.sp\
\\re bee type that makes honey hives in crevices in rock\
\\de Bee hives in rock and associated bees which have a long entrance tube or 'nose' to their hive (as opposed to fv:an-yalk_kebyahwurd 'short-nosed rock honey hive\'92). It may be that this name cross cuts scientific classifications based on bee species and refers to either of the two known species that make hives in rocks and also have a short entrance tube.\
\\sc Austroplebeia essingtonii, Tetragonula mellipes\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yalk kebyahwurd\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge bee.sp\
\\re bee type that makes honey hives in crevices in rock\
\\de Bee hives in rock and associated bees which have a short entrance tube or 'nose' to their hive (as opposed to fv:an-yalk_kebkuyeng 'long-nosed rock honey hive\'92). It may be that this name cross cuts scientific classifications based on bee species and refers to either of the two known species that make hives in rocks and also have a short entrance tube.\
\\sc Austroplebeia essingtonii, Tetragonula mellipes\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Yalkalh\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yalkdohme\
\\ps v.i\
\\de sift through in search of\
\\xv Komrdaw ka-yalkdohme ngalng.\
\\xe The snake-necked turtle sifts around for yabbies.\
\
\\lx yalmo\
\\ps adv.\
\\de slow, slowly, quietly\
\
\\lx yalubme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge wave.in.water\
\\re wave with the flow of water\
\\de wave to and fro with the flow of the current\
\\xv Ya, kune kune, yi-bengkan ka-yalubme. Ka-yalubmiyalubme kun-ronj ronjno ka-bebme wanjh maneh\
kah-rakeldinjhbebme.\
\\xe Yeah, like this, like this, they [the submerged aquatic leaves of fi:Aponogeton_elongatus] wave around in the water. It waves to and fro\
in the water, and then the nodules appear on the plant.\
\\uv I\
\\dt 19/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx yalwerr\
\\lc man-yalwerr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sc Banksia dentata\
\\uv E,W =man-kuybuk\
\\ee GG=gidjburr\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Yamarrk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a now extinct fi:duwa moiety patriclan on the middle to lower Mann River district\
\\xv Na-Burdohken ka-yime ka-kadjurren manih manbu. Yi-bengkan Wamud ya nakka wanjh ngadberre\
ka-bodmeyilkarrmerren manekke. Yoh, na-Burdoh, na-Burdohken and na-Yamarrkken kun-red.\
\\xe The Burdoh clan shares with this one [the Kulmarru]. You know that Wamud, yeah well he shares his clan identity with us. Yes [and\
likewise] the Burdoh clan and the Yamarrk clan country are one and the same.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx yambah\
\\lc + noun class PRON.yambah\
\\ps adj.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de bad, no good\
\\pde -warre\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx yambahmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de become bad\
\\pde warremen\
\\xv karlngunj-yambahminj\
\\pde mim-warreminj\
\\xe His vision has become bad.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yame\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de spear a target\
\
\\lx yamidj\
\\ps n.\
\\de red ochre\
\\uv W= manarr\
\\ee REM= manarr\
\\pdn kk = njamno.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yangalinjdji\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge iron.wood.flowers\
\\re iron wood flowers\
\\de flowers of the iron wood tree\
\\xv An-yangalinjdji an-dubang kono.\
\\xe fv:An-yangalinjdji is the name of ironwood flowers.\
\\sc Erythrophleum chlorostachys\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yangmen\
\\ps n.\
\\de circumcised\
\\bw from English 'young man'.\
\\xv Nakorrkko yangmen-ko.\
\\xe The fv:Na-korrkko pair were both circumcised.\
\
\\lx Yardarr\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place just south-west of Mumeka, a swamp which dries up about June orfv:yekke and then becomes a\
popular wallaby hunting location.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yarl\
\\lc kun-yarl\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de string, fishing line\
\
\\lx Yarlalkared\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\de place name in Rol clan estate, a billabong to the east of the hill called Bung Kabaddudjeng in the\
Mokmek crossing district\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yarlang\
\\ps adj.\
\\ge non-secret\
\\re public, not secret\
\\re unrestricted\
\\re open knowledge\
\\de unrestricted, not sacred, 'open, clear'\
\\xv Konda bolk-yarlang kamak karri-re.\
\\xe This place is unrestricted, it's permissable for us to go through here.\
\\xv Nawu warehware birri-djamun ngarrbenkan, la birri-yarlang bonj rerre kabirrim-re.\
\\xe The sacred participants in the ceremony, we'll take them and the 'outside' participants can come later.\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur darrinj, na-rrarrinj\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx yarlangyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be non-secret, having a public 'open' characteristic\
\\xv Minj yarlang-yoy minj bebkemeninj but nungan kurrmeninj Mardayin rarrk\
na-warlkkayken ya.\
\\xe It wasn't a public thing to be brought out but the Mardayin ceremony established the use of secret cross\
hatching designs which are hidden/secret.\
\\dt 11/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx yarlarrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de disperse\
\\xv bo-yarlarrmeng\
\\xe The water splashed out in all directions.\
\
\\lx yarlbabbabmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge pull.in.line\
\\re reel in line or rope\
\\de haul in, pull line in\
\\xv Yi-yarlbabbabmang werrk!\
\\xe Quick, pull in the line!\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yarlkkan\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de Tree orchid\
\\sc Cymbidium canaliculatum\
\\uv E\
\\uv I = djalamardi\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yarlworowme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swing a fishing line around\
\
\\lx yaril\
\\lc kun-yaril\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\sd plant\
\\de pandanus (generic).\
\\pde kun-dayarr.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx yarrayan\
\\pr an-, man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge Corymbia.ferruginea\
\\re fi:Corymbia.ferruginea\
\\re Rusty bloodwood\
\\de Rusty bloodwood.\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_ferrguinea\
\\sn 2\
\\ge bloodwood.sp\
\\re bloodwood sp.\
\\re fi:Corymbia_kombolgiensis\
\\de Name for a variety of very similar stone country bloodwood species which are very difficult to distinguish. Names for these various bloodwoods can vary from speaker to speaker and are frequently interchangeable.\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_kombolgiensis, fi:Corymbia_polysciada, fi:Corymbia.ferruginea\
\\sn 3\
\\ge bloodwood.sp\
\\re bloodwood spp. (fv:Kun-kurrng register)\
\\de As well as the normal register name for the these bloodwoods, this name is also a fv:Gun-gurrng respectful in-law register term for most eucalypt bloodwood trees that have smooth light coloured bark (e.g. ghost gums and all rock country eucalypt bloodwoods).\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde man-bernbern\
\\sc fi:Corymbia_bella, fi:Corymbia_ferruginea, fi:Corymbia_kombolgiensis, fi:Corymbia_polysciada\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx yarrhme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge rustle\
\\re rustle\
\\de rustling of grass or other vegetation\
\\sy djarrhme\
\
\\lx yarriburrik\
\\ps n.\
\\de matrilineal semi-moiety name (na-ngarradjku)\
\
\\lx yarriburrik\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de black kite\
\\sc Milvus migrans\
\
\\lx yarrikarnkurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\de matry name belonging to the fv:mardku moiety\
\
\\lx Yarrikarnkurrk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Waterfall, plunge pool and gorge on a creek on the northeastern border of the Djalbangurrk estate. Located in a remote stone country area east of the upper Gumardir River (the upper eastern branch of the Goomadeer), however the water flows northeast from here away from the Gumardir. It eventually becomes Kumarringbang Creek (mapped as \'91Manggabor Creek\'92) which flows past Kumarrirnbang outstation. Yarrikarnkurrk is about 23km north-northwest of Kabulwarnamyo outstation. Near Mingakngak. There are fv:mankurndalh (fi:Vitex_glabrata or \'91black currant\'92) fruit trees there which are associated with a fv:djang or black plum sacred site.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 21/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx yarriwurrkkarr\
\\ps n.\
\\de matrilineal semi-moiety name (na-mardku)\
\
\\lx yarriyarninj\
\\ps n.\
\\de matrilineal semi-moiety name (na-ngarradjku)\
\\cf see fv:yarriburrik\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Yarrme\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge place name\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 08/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx yarrngeyarrnge\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge sandpaper.fig\
\\re sandpaper fig\
\\de sandpaper fig trees (two species)\
\\ee The leaves are used as sandpaper to finish woodwork such as spear throwers and spears.\
\\sc Ficus scobina, Ficus opposita\
\\sy man-larr\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\ur Djnj, Kdj (syn.)= an-larr, Kdj (syn.)= an-bambula\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 28/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yaw\
\\ps n. (incorp)\
\\sn 1\
\\de child, young offspring of woman or female animal\
\\xv duruk yaw\
\\xe puppy\
\\xv bi-yaw-mey\
\\xe She had a baby.\
\\sn 2\
\\de small thing\
\\xv Kan-yaw-wok-mang.\
\\xe That little (thing) records our words. (Refering to a small microphone).\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx yawan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de be in search of\
\\xv Manme ka-yawarren. (reflexive)\
\\xe She's looking for food.\
\\cf Yawarrinj\
\\ce s/he was in want (of something)\
\\pdn kk = rombebme\
\
\\lx yawko\
\\pr kabene-\
\\pr bene-\
\\pr bani-\
\\ps n.\
\\de dyadic term used to refer to an adjacent matrilineal pair, i.e. a mother and child pair or a man and his sister's child.\
\\xv Na-badjan nakka, na-yaw, kabene-yawko wanjh.\
\\xe That is his mother's brother and he is the nephew and so they are an adjacent generation matrilineal pair.\
\\sd kinship\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yawko\
\\pr man- \
\\ps n.\
\\va an-yawku\
\\ge Darwin.box\
\\re Darwin box\
\\re fi:Eucalyptus_tectifica\
\\de Darwin box tree. Sacred site for this tree is located on the western side of the Mann River at Kabadyorrkbun near Yikarrakkal.\
\\xv An-yawku yawno an-ngabarrak ngal-badjan.\
\\xe The Darwin box tree is the smaller or 'child tree' and the small-fruited bloodwood is the 'mother tree'.\
\\sc fi:Eucalyptus_tectifica\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 12/Nov/2007\
\
\\lx yawkyawk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\sn 1\
\\de young women, for singular usually the prefix is used fv:ngal-yawkyawk. 2. female spirit, lives in\
water, said to be similar to 'mermaid', appears at night from under rock ledges in the water.\
\\sy fv:ngal-kunburriyaymi, fv:ngal-berd-djenj\
\\pdn kk = kardukardu\
\\ee Sacred sites at many locations eg. Bolerrhlerrh, Barrihdjowkkeng, Malworn.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yaw-mang\
\\lc PRON.yaw-mang\
\\ps n. (deverbal)\
\\de offspring of matriline (ie. mother or mother's siblings)\
\\xv Ngan-yaw-mey kun-red.\
\\xe My mother's country.\
\
\\lx yawno\
\\lc +PREFyawno\
\\ps n.\
\\de small thing, small amount\
\\uv Kune\
\
\\lx yawngu\
\\ps n.\
\\sd triadic term\
\\de Kun-derbi term. My brother your son, you are my mother (I am your son).\
\\cn na-djakerr/na-kokok.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yawok\
pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\re Kakadu katydid\
\\re armadillo katydid\
\\re fi:Kapalgagraecia_nauma\
\\re fi:Armadillagraecia_mataranka\
\\re katydid\
\\de Various species of katydid such as the armadillo katydid and the Kakadu katydid.\
\\sc Armadillagraecia mataranka, Kapalgagraecia nauma\
\\uv I\
\\lf polysemy\
\\lv man-yawok\
\\le round yam sp.\
\\sd insects\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yawok\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\re round yam\
\\re fi:Dioscorea_bulbifera\
\\de Round yam, known in Aboriginal English as 'cheeky yam' because of the toxins that must be leached out by placing slices of the yam into a string bag and leaving it in a flowing creek for a day or so.\
\\sc Dioscorea bulbifera\
\\pdn kk = man-mileken, man-mari\
\\ee The fv:kun-kurrng register names are terms that refer to the woven textiles into which the sliced yam pieces are placed during the leaching process.\
\\cf mileno, marebu\
\\uv W= man-kindjek\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yawurral\
\\ps n.\
\\ge whip.snake\
\\re fi:Demansia_olivacea\
\\de Marble-headed whip snake\
\\sc Demansia olivacea\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 04/Jun/2011\
\
\\lx yawurrinj\
\\ps interj.\
\\de WOW, look at that, fantastic!\
\
\\lx yawurrinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de young men, boys\
\\pl yawuhyawurrinj\
\\pde same in Burarra\
\\pdn kk = wurrnalk\
\
\\lx yawurrinjmen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge become.teenage.boy\
\\re grow into teenage boy\
\\de grow from a boy to a teenager\
\\xv Bu mak man-buyika manu mak, nawu wurdyaw bininj ka-djordmen kam-yawurrinjmen, yikahyika kabirri-re kure\
fs:doctor yikahyikah mak kabirri-re kure kun-kuk bininj. \
\\xe Another thing is, when a young boy grows up and becomes a teenager sometimes they are circumcised by a doctor but sometimes they\
are circumcised in the traditional way by an Aboriginal man.\
\\so Margaret, mother of Travis from Manmoyi\
\\dt 21/Apr/2007\
\
\
\\lx yawwon\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de reproduce (of females)\
\\xv Kaben-yawwon ngalkunburriyaymi yiman ngalyod la ngalberddjenj ngal-buyika.\
\\xe The mermaid spirit can reproduce just like the rainbow serpent but the woman with a tail like a fish\
(another variety) is different.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yayam\
\\ps n.\
\\de children\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde wurdurd\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx yayhyay\
\\lc man-yayhyay\
\\sd plant\
\\ps n.\
\\de small twigs of a branch, especially dead acacias.\
\\ee good kindling\
\
\\lx yayme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de feel itchy\
\
\\lx Yayminji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate, an abandoned Homeland Centre (1991).\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yed\
\\lc kun-yed\
\\ps n.\
\\de home, place, country, 'hearth', living area\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv I= kun-red.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Yedkaberre\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kurulk clan estate\
\
\\lx yehyeng\
\\ps n.\
\\de poison\
\\xv Yun yi-karrme yehyeng wardi yi-rrowen, nakka na-warre yehyeng.\
\\xe Don't touch it, it's poison you might die, it's poison, it's no good.\
\
\\lx yehyeng rowk\
\\ps n.\
\\de everything, all of creation\
\
\\lx yekke\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de dry season, cool weather\
\
\\lx yekke burldjdjarn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd weather\
\\de mid-dry season, typically late June to the end of July\
\
\\lx Yelebidjiyi\
\\va Yelebidji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge prop.n.\
\\re placename in Waybburda estate\
\\de Place in fv:Waybburda estate on Imimbar Creek. Rock shelter contains art galleries including a painting of fv:namarr 'male euro' painted by Kangkuwiba the father of fv:Barabba clansman Mandarrk.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yelerrwanjwanj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de river mangrove\
\\xv Yelerrwanjwanj kabarrhburren.\
\\xe The mangroves make a canopy cover (of leaves).\
\\sc Aegiceras corniculatum\
\
\\lx Yel\'9cboy\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Burlarldjdja clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yembun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pat, stroke, scratch gently\
\\xv Ngarradj kabi-mud-yembun.\
\\xe He's patting the cockatoo's feathers.\
\\xv Ngoyongoyo ka-kodjkeyo djaddi. Ka-kodjkewarre, kabirri-merlem-yembun.\
\\xe The fv:ngoyongoyo frog is a sleeping frog. It is a sleepyhead (ie. it hibernates), they rub their bellies.\
\\uv E=yibbun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yeme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de be shy or 'shame'\
\
\\lx yeme\
\\lc kun-yeme\
\\ps n.\
\\de shame, shyness\
\
\\lx Yenamaraway\
\\va Enamaraway\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djorrorlam/Djordi clan estate with significant rock art sites including a contact painting of a\
European riding a horse.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yende\
\\lc man- (incorporable)yende\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sd geographic\
\\sn 1\
\\de branch coming off main stem or trunk of a tree or plant\
\\xv Nani yi-na bobbidj, la nga-bidbun wanjh nga-rradjeng wanjh nga-rradje nga-yende-dadjke\
nga-yende-dadjke ka-mankan." "Ma ma ma," bidbom wanjh yende-dadjeng, yende-dadjeng\
rowk 'wey bum' mankang.\
\\xe You see that honey hive there, well I'll climb up and cut it, I'll cut all the branches off and it'll fall down.\
"Yeah OK, OK." He climbed up and cut all the branches off; 'thud', it fell down.\
\\sn 2\
\\de branch or tributary of a watercourse.\
\\xv an-yende-wern\
\\xe Lots of little tributaries or channels of a watercourse\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\sy [m]an-kaboh[m]ankabo.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yende\
\\lc man- (incorporable)yende\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\sd geographic\
\\sn 1\
\\de branch coming off main stem or trunk of a tree or plant\
\\xv Nani yi-na bobbidj, la nga-bidbun wanjh nga-rradjeng wanjh nga-rradje nga-yende-dadjke\
nga-yende-dadjke ka-mankan." "Ma ma ma," bidbom wanjh yende-dadjeng, yende-dadjeng rowk\
'wey bum' mankang.\
\\xe You see that honey hive there, well I'll climb up and cut it, I'll cut all the branches off and it'll fall down. "Yeah\
OK, OK." He climbed up and cut all the branches off; 'thud', it fell down.\
\\sn 2\
\\de branch or tributary of a watercourse.\
\\xv an-yendewern\
\\xe Lots of little tributaries or channels of a watercourse\
\\uv Djnj, I\
\\sy (m)an-kaboh(m)ankabo.\
\\dt 23/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx yendeno\
\\va yenderno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de new shoots or sprouts on a branch or other part of a plant.\
\
\\lx Yenemarrbara\
\\va Ayendemarrbara\
\\va Yenemarrabara\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Two large boulders on the side of the river valley cliff face on the west bank of Goomadeer [Kumadderr] river near Kunyikuymi. These represent two ancestral Dreaming dogs Yenemarrbara and Nakorrmohkorrmo. Many Kunwinjku dogs today are given these names. The site is a djang (Dreaming site) and part of the Kabbari complex.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx yeng\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de It's nothing (when it was thought to be something else)\
\\sn 2\
\\de Mythological being which takes the form of something else, typically an animal.\
\\xv "Yabok, yabok, yeng nani yeng kan-wayhkeng wanjh ngarrku."\
\\xe "Sister, sister, it's a serpent that's lifted us both."\
\\sn 3\
\\de venereal disease\
\\xv Yeng ka-karrme.\
\\xe He's got venereal disease.\
\\sn 4\
\\de sickness\
\\xv Bod kan-baye, yeng ka-kurrme.\
\\xe Flies bite us and put sickness.\
\\sn 5\
\\de The term a brother uses to refer to his sister.\
\
\\lx Yengdulubom\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Kardbam clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yengyeng\
\\ps pred. adj.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de not want\
\\pde warnyak\
\\xv Nga-yengyeng nga-yakwan.\
\\pde Nga-warnyak nga-ngun.\
\\xe I don't want to eat it.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yerinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de barn owl\
\\sc Tyto alba\
\\xv Yirrambarn, yerinj mimbabi nakkan, milh-bininj kan-nahnan munguyh.\
\\xe The fv:Tyto family owls are birds which stare hard, they have faces like humans and they are always watching us.\
\\uv I, Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Yerinjkalk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on the upper Cadell River in Boburrk estate. Significant as a site on the route taken by the fv:Nakorrkko ancestral heroes.\
\
\\lx yerrbirdebonghme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de undo, detach\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde yerrkme\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Yerre\
\\ps n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language name\
\\de Language name fv:Erre, a now extinct language of the Alligator Rivers region.\
\\uv I\
\\ur W, Kdj= Erre\
\
\\lx yerre\
\\ps loc. adv.\
\\de a variant pronunciation of fv:rerre\
\\cf see fv:rerre.\
\\dt 26/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx yerrkan\
\\va rerrkan\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sit down\
\\pdn kk = wangakkan\
\
\\lx yerrkke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de Detach, undo, untie rope, remove (eg. clothing).\
\\xv Yi-yerrkkemen!\
\\xe Get undressed!\
\
\\lx yerrkme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge detach\
\\re detach\
\\re come loose\
\\re loosen (v.i.)\
\\de become loose, become detached, become undone (of rope, string, knots)\
\\sn 2\
\\re removal of foreskin\
\\de euphemism for circumcision\
\\xv Djanakdjanek man-dule manekke wayini Bangardi wanjh yerrkmeng.\
\\xe Bangardi sang the song (in a genre called Djanadjanak) and then he (the boy) was circumcised.\
\\pdn kk = yerrbirdebonghme\
\\dt 02/May/2007\
\
\\lx yewkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge rinse\
\\re rinse out \
\\de RInse a substance out, e.g. rinse poison off eg. after catching fish by poisoning them.\
\\xv Ngarri-yewkme djenj kurlahno ngarri-kinje.\
\\xe We rinse the poison off the fishes' skin, then we cook it.\
\
\\lx yeyke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de give away hiding place, find OBJ in hiding\
\\dv "That mean kandi-nan."\
\\xv Kabindi-yeyke.\
\\xe They'll find them hiding.\
\
\\lx yeykerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de give self away in hiding, cause self to be found in hiding.\
\
\\lx yeyme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de cry, mourn, 'yey, yey.'\
\
\\lx yi\
\\ps interj.\
\\de isn't it?, 'is this correct?', (said with rising intonation)\
\\ee Kriol = yindid?\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yi (-yi-)\
\\ps comitative prefix or infix\
\\de "A personal or impersonal infix, with usually an object meaning, referring back to some person,\
creature, inanimate object, and so on, already mentioned." (Berndt & Berndt 1951:49)\
\\xv Ngam-yi-durndeng.\
\\xe I'll bring it back.\
\\xv Kabi-yi-lobme\
\\xe He's running with her.\
\\xv dulk-yi-yoy.\
\\xe He lay with a splinter (in his leg).\
\\xv Wok-yi dorreng karri-borrkke.\
\\xe Let's call out as we dance (make the correct sounds).\
\\xv Kornobolo yaw mud-yi.\
\\xe A baby wallaby with fur.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Yibarddang\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region \
\\de Site along a stretch of creek east of the north end of Djidbidjidbi (the Mount Brockman outlier). The creek flows north from here into Magela Creek. \
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx Yibadjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\de language name Iwadja/Iwaidja as spoken on Couburg Peninsula and Croker Island.\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx Yibadjdja\
\\va Yiwadjdja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge language.name\
\\re language name\
\\de language name Iwadja/Iwaidja as spoken on Couburg Peninsula and Croker Island.\
\\sd metalinguistic\
\\so Mick Kubarkku\
\\uv I\
\\dt 05/May/2007\
\
\\lx Yibaladjyikod\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Born clan estate, site of leach dreaming.\
\
\\lx Yibalk\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Magela Creek region \
\\de Named site on an eastern tributary of Magela Creek east of Jabiru.\
\\sd place name\
\\dt 7/Feb/2016\
\
\\lx yibarlirr\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de dilly bag carried by male water spirits at Benebenemdi in Barabba clan estate.\
\
\\lx Yibarrewudje\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place near Yimayhyirud billabong in Kadjarngu clan estate.\
\
\\lx yibba\
\\ps n.\
\\re ornate burrowing frog\
\\de Frog which burrows into small holes in the ground which fill with water.\
\\sc Limnodynastes ornatus\
\\xv Yibba, ngoyongoyo ka-kodjkeyo, kodjdjewarre kabirri-merlemyembun. Kukurlk ka-yo.\
\\xe The ornate burrowing frog and other burrowing frogs sleep, hibernating, they rub their abdomens (when they sleep buried). They sleep in the ground.\
\\sd reptiles/amphib.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Yibba Djang\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Frog sacred site in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate. The fv:yibba frog species is a major totem for\
fv:Darnkorlo clan.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yibbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de rub, caress\
\\xv Ngoyongoyo ka-kodjkeyo djaddi. Ka-kodjkewarre, kabirri-merlem-yibbun.\
\\xe The fv:ngoyongoyo frog is a sleeping frog. It is a sleepyhead (ie. it hibernates), they rub their bellies.\
\\uv I=yembun\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Yibidbalama\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Fishing site at Bulkay on the Tomkinson River floodlain where fences and conical woven fish traps fv:mandjabu are placed to trap fish.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yibke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de submerge something, cause to sink down\
\
\\lx yibme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de sink down\
\\xv Muddikang yibmeng ngadberre.\
\\xe Our car is bogged.\
\\xv Yina, nakkan kumoken ka-yibme.\
\\xe Look, that freshwater crocodile is going under the water.\
\
\\lx Yibukbukkana\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in bushland in Kadjarngu clan estate.\
\
\\lx Yidakdak\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Creek in a very open area in the Maburrinj estate. Downstream to the north is the famous delek site Madjanngalkku. Yidakdak is on the creek just east-southeast of the elbow in the Goomadeer River, where it makes a sharp right-angle turn to the north following the confluence of the upper \'91Goomadeer\'92 and \'91Gumardir\'92 branches. \
\\xv Madjanngalkku-beh Yidakdak-beh kawanjdjadduluburren kure Djabulu.\uc0\u8232 \\xe From Madjanngalkku and Yidakdak (downstream) there is a confluence of small tributaries at Djabulu (upstream).\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx yidek\
\\lc kun-yidek\
\\ps n.\
\\de smooth or polished surface\
\\cf kuk-yidek\
\\ce slippery or slimey bodied eg. eel.\
\
\\lx yidekno\
\\ps n.\
\\de slimey or viscous substance\
\
\\lx yidme\
\\lc kun-yidme\
\\va yidmeno\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de teeth\
\\pdn kk = kun-kudjirri\
\
\\lx yidmelirrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\re bare one\'92s teeth\
\\de Give a cheesy grin, bare one\'92s teeth.\
\\xv Midjakkurr ka-yidmelirrme, ka-djekme.\
\\xe Midjakkurr [a dog] is showing his teeth, he\'92s laughing.\
\\dt 19/Oct/2015\
\
\\lx yidmeno\
\\ps n.\
\\de sharp serrations along the margins of various plants eg. pandanus.\
\
\\lx yidok\
\\ps ?check\
\\de Is it true that?\
\\xv Yidok bene-durrinj?\
\\xe Is it true they had an argument?\
\
\\lx yidjekme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de laugh\
\\pde djekme\
\\xv Ngarri-yidjekmeng ngarri-ngarirrihmeng.\
\\xe We were sick with laughter.\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Yidurrbben\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de Site on the Goomadeer River, on its upper branch before the confluence of the \'91Gumardir\'92 River. It lies downstream from Kubomerlem and upstream from Ngabardengulduma, near where the large sandstone outlier between the river branches encroaches from the east. \
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx yihke\
\\va yirhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de draw back an outer surface to reveal or expose what's inside\
\\ee This verb is used for elongate objects. As an example the word is used to describe the action of\
running one's finger along the length of a fern leaf and breaking off the leave segments. As can be\
imagined it also has obscene contexts also.\
\\xv Yi-berd-yirhkerren!\
\\xe Go and pull yourself!\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yik (-yik-)\
\\ps infix\
\\de an infix which preceeds the name of the clan of a deceased person\
\\xv Na-yik-Wurrbbarn\
\\xe A deceased person of the Wurrbbarn clan.\
\
\\lx yika\
\\ps conjunc.\
\\de sometimes, maybe, some\
\\xv Namekke nadjinem manme ka-ngun man-badbirri, yika ka-kolung ku-wardde ka-kolung\
man-buyhbuyika ka-ngun.\
\\xe That black rock kangaroo eats Uvaria fruit, sometimes it comes down from the rocks and eats\
other kinds of food.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yi-kadjurren\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de share 2.be in a 'company' or sharing relationship with other groups for ownership of clan lands\
\
\\lx yi-kan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de go for something, fetch\
\\xv Karri-kerriyikan ba karri-kerribun karri-kinje kunj.\
\\xe Let's go for antbed so we can make a ground oven and cook this kangaroo.\
\\xv Bale yi-re? Nga-bo-yikan.\
\\xe Where are you going? I'm going to get water.\
\
\\lx Yikarrakkal\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place on the Mann River south of Kubumi and location of an outstation in the Kubumi-Ngolkwarre estates.\
\\ee duwa\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Yikorlng\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de fv:Wubarr ceremony place in fv:Marrin clan estate\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yikurrumu\
\\ps n.\
\\de ceremonial version of an ordinary clan name\
\\xv Bu karri-ngadjinbun, karri-ngeybun kun-nguya yikurrumu.\
\\xe If we sneeze, we call out the fv:yikurrumu version of our clan name.\
\
\\lx yil\
\\lc kun-yil\
\\va yilno\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\de vein 2.sinew\
\\xv Yi-berl-yil-kimuk.\
\\xe You've got big veins in your arm.\
\
\\lx yilawarnberd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de caterpillar species\
\\uv E\
\
\\lx yilinjbirrk\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Xanthostemon.eucalyptoides\
\\re fi:Xanthostemon_eucalyptoides\
\\de kind of large tree (12-20m)\
\\xv An-yilinjbirrk an-kuken an-kung ka-rrahkendong.\
\\xe fi:Xanthostemon_eucalyptoides is an important source of nectar for bees who gather the nectar to fill their hives.\
\\sc Xanthostemon eucalyptoides\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yilk\
\\pr man-\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Cyperas.javanicus\
\\re fi:Cyperas_javanicus\
\\de kind of sedge used for paint brushes which create the fine lines of hatching infill in painting\
\\sc Cyperas javanicus\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yilkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de slither over OBJ\
\\xv Wud yi-rrahkendo biliken wardi ngun-yilkan.\
\\xe Put the worms in the billycan otherwise they'll slither all over you.\
\
\\lx yilkbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de cut meat with a stone knife\
\
\\lx yilnguk\
\\ps n.\
\\de eggs of head lice\
\
\\lx yilruk\
\\va yilurrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de squid\
\\ee Bu karri-danjbun ka-ngukdeng.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yilurrk\
\\va yilruk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd fish\
\\de squid\
\
\\lx yilyilimbirrk\
\\lc man-yilyilimbirrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de native lasiandra\
\\sc Melastoma polyanthum\
\\bb GW, TENP p.256\
\
\\lx Yimakkalili\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de large plain and mangrove forest in fv:Marrin clan estate visited for flying fox hunting.\
\\ee yirridjdja.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Yimalannga\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Kumadderr river region\
\\de A small gorge and jungle just to the east of Kunyikuymi. The gorge runs approximately north-south and fronts onto the Goomadeer River at the southern end where the river does a tight bend just before Kunyikuymi.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 20/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx yiman\
\\ps prep.\
\\sn 1\
\\de similar to, like,\
\\xv ...yiman makkan njale kabirri-ngeybun? Djedbarlh, yo djedbarlh\
\\xe ...it's like that thing they call what? fv:Djedbarl yes, fv:djedbarl.\
\\xv Yiman ka-marnburren mimih but ngarri-ngeybun djangkarla yo, yiman bininj but\
ka-djal-marnburren yiman bininj.\
\\xe He's like one who can turn himself into a mimih but we call him fv:Djangkarla, like a man, but he just\
transforms himself into a man.\
\\sn 2\
\\de about the same as\
\\xv Mayh ngurrurdu ma birri-munkeweng wam kure yiman kondanj dolkkang la\
Barlbbanarra.\
\\xe Well, they sent the emu and she went about as far as here to Barlbbanarra.\
\\ps 2. conj.\
\\sn 3\
\\de if, such as when\
\\xv Yo, djurn nameke djang kah-di. 'But' na-djal-kudji nakka 'but dreaming' yiman ka-di yo\
wardi yi-djangkan yi-nan yiman ngimeng bininj ba nakka djang ngadberre.\
\\xe Yes, the black-headed python sacred site is there. But it's really a dreaming and if you should go\
hunting you'll see it going inside like a man, but that's our dreaming.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yiman bonj\
\\ps prep.\
\\de just like this (example given)\
\\xv Bi-djal-berl-karrmeng la djal-mey kun-dulk yiman bonj kunekke ka-yime.\
\\xe He just grabbed him by the arm and just got a stick, just like this (shows size with hands), that's how it\
was.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yimang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de take an object off someone\
\
\\lx Yimardawen\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djok clan estate and site for the Ubarr ceremony.\
\
\\lx yimarnek\
\\va yimarnkek\
\\ps particle\
\\de Counterfactual marker to indicate the irrealis. A meaning could be 'as it was' or 'it was the case that 'x'\
should have'.\
\\xv Yimarnek ngarayi minj nga-djareniwirrinj.\
\\xe I should have gone but I didn't want to.\
\\xv Yimarnek kamrayi kare kurrinj.\
\\xe He should have come but maybe he was lying.\
\\xv Ya 'darrrr' bi-djal-bom kun-dad nakka wirriwirriyak nuye yimarnek yurruburdihme\
bi-bom wanjh bi-warrewong djal-mankang djal-mankang kuk-yoy.\
\\xe Yeah, 'darrrr', he just hit her in the leg, that wife of black-faced cuckoo shrike. She tried to run off but\
he killed her, she fell down and her body lay there.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Yimayhyirud\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place on Liverpool River (western side) about five kilometres north of fv:Kolngkadi in fv:Kadjarngu\
clan estate. Visited for fishing, pigs, and magpie geese.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yime\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de call\
\\sn 2\
\\de do, act\
\\xv Baleh karri-yime.\
\\xe What have we got to say?/ What are we going to do?\
\\xv Kunekke ka-yime.\
\\xe That's the way it goes (it goes like that).\
\\sn 3\
\\de Also an auxiliary verb used to incorporate English words.\
\\xv Kamak, ngurri-kan 'use' ngurri-yime.\
\\xe It's OK, you take it and use it\
\\cf marneyime\
\\ce to tell somebody\
\\xv Njale kun-wok ngundi-marneyimeng?\
\\xe What news did they tell you?\
\\pdn kk = dakalhme\
\\cf Karri-yimen!\
\\cf var. Karrimen.\
\\ce An interjection at the end of a phrase or sentence meaning 'oops just joking' or 'oops maybe that's\
wrong'.\
\\dt 15/Feb/2005\
\
\\lx yimerran\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become, turn into, change, become in future (time)\
\\xv Kaluk yekke ka-yimerran.\
\\xe Soon it will be dry season.\
\
\\lx yimiwon\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de do, go about something\
\\xv Baleh nga-yimiwon?\
\\xe How do I do this?\
\
\\lx Yimukundji\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx Yinamudja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Marrin clan estate\
\\xv Yinamudja bolk-marrin-kenh.\
\\xe fv:Yinamudja is a place in fv:Marrin clan estate.\
\\ee yirridjdja\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx Yinamudjdja\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in Djok clan estate on a creek.\
\
\\lx Yingalyimim\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de sacred site on Tomkinson flood plain in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx yingan\
\\ps refl..pron.\
\\de yourself (sing.)\
\
\\lx yingarddurd\
\\ps n.\
\\sd shellfish/crustacean\
\\sn 1\
\\de shellfish name for Tapes hiantina and Tapes dorsatus\
\\sc Tapes hiantina, Tapes dorsatus.\
\\sn 2\
\\de name for a song series used in a Burarra version of the Mamurrng ceremony\
\\pde Burarra = diyama.\
\
\\lx Yingarna\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mythology\
\\de mother rainbow serpent, the mother of fv:ngalyod, really 'biggest one'.\
\
\\lx Yingarabak\
\\ps n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place on Tomkinson River, Mardayin ceremony dreaming site. Crocodiles live at this site.\
\
\\lx yingarreyabmeng\
\\ps interj\
\\de swearing-"fuck you"\
\
\\lx yingarreyabok\
\\ps interj.\
\\de swearing-"you cunt"\
\
\\lx yingki-\
\\ps adv. pref.\
\\de straight away, first in a series of actions\
\\xv Kun-madj ngurri-yingki-marnbu la kumurrng karri-re.\
\\xe Get your swags ready beforehand because we'll be going early.\
\\xv Ngarre nga-yingki-bo-mang.\
\\xe Let's go, I'll get diesel straight away.\
\
\\lx yingkibun\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de go home, go first in line\
\\uv Kune\
\\sy rrokme\
\
\\lx Yingundje\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de Place in Djok clan estate (large meteor crater of 1.5 km diameter) with rock shelters and dreaming sites for the Water Whistle Duck fv:djilikuybirr and the black duck fv:ngarnkurl.\
\\xv Yingundje kure ngarnkul djang ka-rri.\
\\xe Yingundje is where the black duck dreaming is situated.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Yinjbirr\
\\ps place.n.\
\\re place name\
\\de A rocky hill south of Gunbalanya near the Red Lily lagoon called Wulk [or Woelk].\
\\xv Yinjbirr na-waddaweleng na-Wakadj na-Mandjulngunj.\
\\xe Yinjbirr was an important camping place for Nawakadj of the Mandjulngunj clan [Mengerrdji language].\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 19/Oct/2015\
\
\
\\lx yirdebme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\ge slip\
\\re slip over\
\\de slide, slip out/over\
\\xv Yi-nahnarrimen wardi yi-yirdebme yi-mankan.\
\\xe Look out, you might slip and fall.\
\\xv Kurrih Birrangdoy bewubeh kurrih djang kumekke yirdebmeng bi-rrangdoy mankang.\
\\xe At Kurrih Birrangdoy there on the far side there, is a totemic site where the blue-tongued skink slipped and struck his tongue when he fell.\
\
\\lx yilingkirrkkirr\
\\ps n.\
\\re white-throated grass wren\
\\re fi:Amytornis_woodwardi\
\\de White-throated grass wren.\
\\sc Amytornis woodwardi\
\\uv Djnj, W\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 03/May/2014\
\
\\lx Yirolk\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re place on lower Liverpool River\
\\de place on the lower Liverpool River which is the location of a maggot fv:djang or totemic sacred site\
\\sd placename\
\
\\lx yirralal\
\\va yilalal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de kind of tree (5-15m) which grows in monsoon vine thickets and is generally restricted to the most western parts of Arnhem Land and in Kundjeyhmi country.\
\\xv Yirralal marrek konda ka-rri, kure kabbal ka-rri.\
\\xe The fi:Elaeocarpus_arnhemicus is not found here (on the highlands of the Arnhem Land plateau), it grows on the lower plains.\
\\sc Elaeocarpus arnhemicus\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur I= man-kurddu\
\\dt 23/Mar/2004\
\
\\lx yirrambarn\
\\ps n.\
\\sd bird\
\\de generic for owls of the family fv:Tyto, i.e. barn owl, grass owl and masked owl. The barn owl is also referred to more specifically as fv:yerinj\
\\xv Yirrambarn, yerinj mimbabi nakkan, milh-bininj kan-nahnan munguyh.\
\\xe The fv:Tyto family owls are birds which stare hard, they have faces like humans and they are always watching us.\
\\sc Tyto alba, Tyto capensis, Tyto novaehollandiae\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Yirrarrkiya\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de small place within fv:Kubukkan district, fv:man-labbarl 'billabong', in fv:Mirwi patriclan estate.\
\\ee kun-bolk duwa\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yirrbardbard\
\\ps n.\
\\ge taipan\
\\re taipan\
\\re fi:Oxyuranus_scutellatus\
\\de Taipan. Significant in fv:wubarr ceremony mythology.\
\\sc fi:Oxyuranus_scutellatus\
\\ur Kdj= djurrang\
\\sd reptiles/amphibians\
\\dt 28/Dec/2008\
\
\\lx yirrbbinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de large monsoon forest tree (10-20m) and sometimes grows within fv:anbinik forests.\
\\sc Polyalthea australis, Polyalthea nitidissima\
\
\\lx yirrbinjbinj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de kind of small blossum bat, smaller than fv:malambibbi\
\\sc unidentified\
\\uv Djnj\
\
\\lx yirrek\
\\va yirrekyirrek\
\\ps adj.\
\\de slimey, slippery\
\\xv kuk-yirrek\
\\xe slippery body (i.e. an eel)\
\\xv Man-bak ka-djordme ku-ronj. Man-yirrekyirrek.\
\\xe fv:Man-bak grows in the water. It is a slimey plant.\
\
\\lx yirrek\
\\ps adj.\
\\de slippery, slimey, viscous\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx yirrekme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de become slimey, slippery or viscous.\
\
\\lx yirrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de pull back a covering or outer material on an elongate object\
\\xv Yi-ray yi-berdyirrhkerren!\
\\xe Go away and pull yourself!\
\
\\lx yirrhmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de peel, strip or wipe away outer covering or substance from an elongate object\
\\xv Yiman 'oil' murrika-ken kun-dulk karri-yirrhmang.\
\\xe Like the dipstick of a car to check the oil, we wipe the oil off it.\
\\sy yirrme\
\
\\lx yirri\
\\ps n.\
\\de gravy, cooking juices from meat.\
\
\\lx yirridjdja\
\\ps n.\
\\de patrilineal moiety name\
\\an duwa\
\
\\lx yirrikurrme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place OBJs in a line.\
\
\\lx Yirrinjbudduk\
\\ps prop.n.\
\\ge placename\
\\re placename\
\\de Place in Ngolkwarre estate.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 09/Jan/2014\
\
\\lx Yirrirddird\
\\ps place n.\
\\re place name in Birrirddak Creek region\
\\de Billabong in Birrirddak Creek upstream from Kunmayimbuk, in the gorge between the Gunbalanya-Maningrida and Gunbalanya-Nabarlek roads.\
\\xv Kaddum makka kore ka-yawbarrarn ka-bokahkabongimen makka Yirrirddid. Kanjdji ka-djale Kunmayimbuk.\uc0\u8232 \\xe Upstream (from Kunmayimbuk) there is a narrow gorge where the creek flows in there at Yirrirddid. Downstream then is Kunmayimbuk.\
\\sd placename\
\\dt 13/Jun/2015\
\
\\lx yirryirrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de make sound of cicadas, the sound of fv:dirnadirna, the cicada\
\
\\lx yirriyo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\de elongate object lying/hanging\
\\xv Nakkan Bangardi ka-berdyirri-yo!\
\\xe There's Bangardi's prick hanging down! [joking relationship speech]\
\\sn 2\
\\de lie in parallel, lie next to\
\\xv Wurdurd, ngurri-kuk-marnburrimen ngurri-yirriyun!\
\\xe You kids organise yourself so you're all lying down next to each other (parallel).\
\\xv Nawu Kune, Dangbon ka-yirriyo.\
\\xe Kune and Dangbon are neighbouring languages.\
\
\\lx yirrk\
\\lc kun-yirrk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de string bag\
\\xv Kun-yirrk ka-bernalkan.\
\\xe She's carrying a string bag over her shoulder.\
\
\\lx yirrkal\
\\ps n.\
\\sd plant\
\\de tall species of mangrove along Liverpool River\
\
\\lx yirrkbadj\
\\ps n.\
\\re water rat\
\\re Australian water rat\
\\re fi:Hydromys_chrysogaster\
\\de Australian water rat.\
\\sc Hydromys chrysogaster\
\\uv I, E\
\\ur W= yirrkku, Kdj= yirrbadj\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx yirrkbun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de cut flesh/tissue or meat, especially with a stone knife, 2.circumcise\
\
\\lx yirrkiyirrki\
\\ps n.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge palm.tree\
\\re palm tree sp.\
\\de a small version of fv:kolng palm tree (kentia palm) which is the name for a totemic plant at the escarpment site fv:Dilebang on the eastern side of the Mann RIver near Manmoyi. Possibly this is the name for the juvenile palm and also the name for a stunted plant of the same species which is much smaller because of its rock habitat.\
\\sc Hydriastele ramsayi\
\\sn 2\
\\ge palm.tree\
\\re fi:Carpentaria_acuminata\
\\re palm tree sp.\
\\de carpentaria palm\
\\sc Carpentaria acuminata\
\\uv Djnj\
\\uv Kdj= an-karnbanj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 17/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx yirrkku\
\\ps n.\
\\re water rat\
\\re Australian water rat\
\\re fi:Hydromys_chrysogaster\
\\de Australian water rat.\
\\sc Hydromys chrysogaster\
\\uv W\
\\ur I, E= yirrkbadj, Kdj= yirrbadj\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 31/Mar/2013\
\
\\lx yirrme\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps v.t.\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge peel_down\
\\ge strip\
\\re peel lengthways\
\\re strip off\
\\de strip, peel or remove layer of an elongate object, most commonly pandanus leaves during the process of preparing pandanus fibre for\
weaving and string knotting or the inner bark of fi:Acacia_difficilis to make string or a honey sponge\
\\xv Arri-ngobanbidmang arri-yirrme an-yakngarra. Ngad daluk arri-yirrme.\
\\xe We split the pandanus leaves and pull them apart. We women do the peeling apart (of the pandanus).\
\\cf ngobanyirrme\
\\dt 16/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx yirrolkan\
\\ps v.t.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de take\
\\pde kan\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx Yirrord\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de a small creek which runs into the Liverpool River in fv:Marrin clan estate.\
\\ee yirridjdja.\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yirrurl\
\\lc man-yirrurl\
\\ps n.\
\\de string, fishing line\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde wakkidj, man-yarl.\
\\xv Man-yirrurl kan-weybu nga-dokan nga-warhke.\
\\pde Wakkidj kano nga-re nga-we.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yiwarrudj\
\\ps n.\
\\de religious fellowship or celebration. This word is almost exclusively used in a Christian context.\
\\xv Karri-re yiwarrudj karri-burlume Ngabbard.\
\\xe Let's go to fellowship and praise Father (God).\
\
\\lx yiwerr\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Calytrix.sp.\
\\re Calytrix sp. (unidentified)\
\\de kind of woody shrub found in rock country\
\\nt the English name/scientific name of this plant is not yet established\
\\xv An-yiwerr, an-djumbak, an-wurrben, an-ngale, an-dadjek an-mardba, djangno. Kanjdji kah-yo bu kah-djuhkendi, wurrkeng. An-mardba an-barlanjdjarr, fs:all_that. Nayuhyungki nawu nungan ba-ngehngeybuni bu bah-djangweyi. Ngabbard barri-djangweyi, na-Mok na-Berdberd. \
\\xe An-yiwerr [unidentified plant], stone country calytrix [Calytrix achaeta], fi:Lophostemon lactifluus,_Grevillea pteridifolia,_Eucalyptus phoenicea, they all have a fv:djang [sacred site]. In the mid dry season that site is still under the water [near a water course]. The fi:Eucalyptus phoenicea,_Eucalyptus_miniata and all those. The first ancestors called their names and performed increase rituals for them. My father [and his brothers] performed increase rituals, they were of Mok and Berdberd clans. \
\\sc Calytrix sp.?\
\\sd plant\
\\uv Djnj\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yi-wirmeng\
\\cf see fv:wirmeng\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yiwkme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de dislocate\
\\xv Karlang-murrng-yiwkmeng.\
\\xe He dislocated his shoulder.\
\
\\lx yo\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge be\
\\de to be located in a particular place\
\\xv Man-me ka-yo?\
\\xe Is there any food?\
\\xv Korroko marrek ba-rurrkyuwurrinj kumekke.\
\\xe A long time ago, there was no building there.\
\\xv Nani ka-yo [kun-wok].\
\\xe This [language] is from here (this language dialect/variety belongs to this location).\
\\xv Man-dule ka-karrme nungka Ubarr. Nani Ubarr ka-yo Djamamburr.\
\\xe The Ubarr ceremony has its own songs. There is an Ubarr ceremony place at\
Djamamburr.\
\\sn 2\
\\ge lie\
\\de to be lying down (of elongate objects)\
\\xv Kunrurrkkurduk, ngayi ngan-marnemurrngyo. Name kalngbuy.\
\\xe At the place Kunrurrkkurduk [near Mankorlod] those bones lying there are for me.\
Those ceremonial 'boy's first-kill kangaroo' bones.\
\\sn 3\
\\ge sleep\
\\de sleep\
\\xv A: Bukkanj kah-ni nakkanj? B: Ka-yo.   \
\\xe A: Is he there that one [the one you should know I mean]? B: He's asleep.                 \
\\cf Yi-yun!\
\\ce Go to sleep!\
\\cf Minj yuwirrinj.\
\\ce S/he didn't sleep.\
\\cf Yongehyoy.\
\\ce S/he was sleeping./ S/he used to sleep.\
\\sn\
\\pdn kk = morndi\
\\dt 22/Dec/2006\
\
\\lx yoh\
\\va yo\
\\va yoweyh\
\\va yuw\
\\ph\
\\ps interj\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge yes\
\\re yes\
\\de Yes\
\\ng\
\\xv A: Nakka Nakurrurndilhba.   B: Kunekke kakebyime?   A: Kebdadjmeng. \
C: Kanemkunj.   A: Yoh, kodjkunj.\
\
\\xe A:This is (a painting of) Nakurrurndilhba.   B: Is it's snout like that?     A:  It has a\
truncated nose.  C: And ears like a kangaroo.   A: Yes, a head like a kangaroo.\
\\ee\
\\bw\
\\sd\
\\so A= LBN, B=Emmanuel Namarnyilk, C= Murray Garde\
\\uv W, E, I, Djnj\
\\ur Kdj, Djnj= woh\
\\an\
\\sy\
\\sc\
\\bb\
\\dt 22/Dec/2006\
\
\\lx yok\
\\ps n.\
\\re bandicoot\
\\re brown bandicoot\
\\re northern brown bandicoot\
\\re fi:Isoodon_macrourus\
\\de Northern brown bandicoot.\
\\sc Isoodon macrourus\
\\uv I, W= yok\
\\ur E = kobbol\
\\pdn yomyom\
\\sd mammal\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx Yok Karri\
\\lit 'Bandicoot place'\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Darnkorlo clan estate.\
\
\\lx yokkolomud\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Alloteropsis.semialata\
\\re fi:Alloteropsis_semialata\
\\de Kind of grass (possibly two different species).\
\\xv An-yokkolomud an-kung arri-barungi arri-djuhkeyi arri-nguni ngurrurdu arri-karlkidnguni.\
\\xe We used the fv:an-yokkolomud grass to soak up honey and to drink the gravy juice from cooked emus.\
\\sc Alloteropsis semialata, Chrysopogon sp.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yokkorol\
\\pr an-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Triodia.plechtrechnoides\
\\re spinifex sp.\
\\re fi:Triodia_plechtrechnoides\
\\de kind of rock country spinifex\
\\ee Bininj identify two kinds of fi:Triodia_plechtrechnoides, a large and a small variety. fv:An-yokkorol> is the large variety. The small variety is called fv:an-karne.\
\\xv Anyokkorol an-mirrhbang.\
\\xe The fi:Triodia_plechtrechnoides grasses have painful sharp spikes.\
\\xv Ankarne, yo anbuyika, 'sharp one' yiman kayime 'needle'. Bu kundenge yi-re ngundulubun. Anwern konda walem kahdi Mann River Wurrey, boyen ngarriwam ngad Mann River. Bu yi-re budwok ngundulubun. Ngunmudyakwon ngundulubun. Kunkarremud karrulubun kayawoyakwon, ankarne. Kunngey bokenh anyokkorol, ankarne. Karohrok.\
\\xe JK: That's called fv:ankarne, really sharp like a needle. If you walk through it, it pierces you. There's a lot of it on the Mann River at Wurrey that time we went down south onthe Mann River. It sticks your foot\
when you walk through it. And it rips off the hair on your leg, that fv:ankarne. It's got two names- fv:ankarne and fv:anyokkorol but it's the same plant.\
\\sc Triodia plechtrechnoides\
\\sd plant\
\\p anyokkorol_2.jpg (in Kundedjnjenghmi plants 2 file, iPhoto)\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx Yoknaw\'9clebang\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place in fv:Wurrbbarn clan estate\
\\uv E, D\
\\ee Bandicoot site, "Djorrhno minj ka-di",-the time when he didn't have (the same) body (as he does\
today).\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yol\
\\ps n.\
\\pdv kk\
\\de man, people\
\\pde bininj\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx yolobme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de fly up into the air, flick up\
\\xv Wanjh kom-dadjmeninj la bene-djal-wam la yolobmeng wanjh mankang dolkang mankang\
"djurruh" djuhmeng wanjh yimeng kurlbburru djorrhdolkang wanjh dolkang namekke la\
njamed kurlbburru\
\\xe They had nearly cut through the neck of Nimbuwa but then suddenly the axe head flew off and fell\
down "splash" into the water.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yolyolme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de tell a story, relate news.\
\
\\lx yomyom\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de northern brown bandicoot\
\\sc Isoodon macrourus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde yok\
\\dt 19/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx yonkobbam\
\\pr kun-\
\\lc kun-yonkobbam\
\\ps n.\
\\sd body part\
\\de calf of leg\
\\uv W\
\\uv I= kun-karrekobbam\
\\dt 22/Dec/2006\
\
\\lx yonme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de gossip about someone\
\\dv Kabirri-marneyolyolme.\
\\uv I\
\\xv Kabi-yonme.\
\\xe S/he's gossiping about her/him.\
\\dt 22/Dec/2006\
\
\\lx an-yong\
\\va ngan-yong\
\\ps n.\
\\re fi:Ipomoea_dunlopii\
\\de Slightly woody vine climbing high in surrounding trees; very closely related to fi:Ipomea_abrupta. The leaves are narrow to broadly ovate or triangular, blade 50-150 mm long x 15-120 mm wide, sometimes with rounded spear shaped lobes at the base, petiole 25-75 mm long. The flowers are funnel-shaped, mauve to purple with darker throat, petals 65 mm to 85 mm long.The fruit is a globular capsule, 10-14 mm diameter with 4 black seeds to 7 mm long covered in long dense sinuous white to pale brown hairs to 4 mm long. The tubers or 'yams' are roasted on coals before being eaten.\
\\sc Ipomoea dunlopii\
\\xv An-warddewaken, bad mimih ke ka-ngun, ka-ngun ngalekke mimih, an-yong, ngan-burre. Nguddah, Bulanj, yi-ngeybun, karri-ngeybun mak ngan-burre.\
\\xe It grows in the rock country but mimih spirits eat it, that an-yong tuber. You Bulanj,\
you call it.... we also all call it fv:ngan-burre.\
\\uv Djnj\
\\ur W, I= man-burre, Kdj= an-burre\
\\sd plant\
\\dt 22/Dec/2006\
\
\\lx yongen\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge lay.down\
\\re lay down\
\\de to lay down\
\\sn 2\
\\ge be\
\\re be in a particular state\
\\de to come into a particular state (inceptive)\
\\xv Lirrk bu ka-yongen ka-lirrkdangen ka-rrowen fi:well_that_mean ka-re\
mununno kukakno. Yika kukakno yika kayakki ka-ni, ka-yo kunj.\
\\xe When the new moon forms, when the moon is just a sliver, well that means it goes around in the dark of night. Sometimes it's active at\
night and sometimes the kangaroo sleeps and just stays there (in a den).\
\\sn 3\
\\re sleep\
\\de go to sleep\
\\xv Man-dolngkimuk wanjh ka-keyongen.\
\\xe With all the smoke, [the baby] will go to sleep.\
\\sn 4\
\\ge camp\
\\de camp, stay or live at \
\\re camp, stay, live at\
\\xv dabborrabbolk barri-yonginj kure ka-warddeboboyo. \
\\xe The old people/ancestors used to sleep in rock shelters with protruding overhanging\
ceilings.\
\\so Lofty Bardayal Nadjamerek\
\\xv Kandi-bengka bu ngarr-re andehne an-bo:lk arri-bebme Kolorrhyi-kah\
raitab Kolorrhyi arri-bebme la Kamarrkawarn wanjh arri-kadjung\
arri-yongen ku-wardde maitbi o kun-kanalanj malamalayi\
arri-malayi-bebme Kamarrkawarn.\
\\xe You know who we are [addressing ancestral spirits], let's go together in this place\
and we will arrive at Kolorrhyi as far as Kolorrhyi and Kamarrkawarn and then we\
will follow on and maybe sleep in a rock shelter or maybe at a sandy place and the\
following morning, early morning, we will arrive at Kamarrkawarn.\
\\so Jack Djandjomerr\
\\uv Djnj, Kdj, W\
\\dt 22/Apr/2007\
\
\\lx Yorndidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\sd placename\
\\de place which was most likely an old fv:yorndidj or stone blade quarry. David Karlbuma (Kamarrang na-Barabba) said the 'real' name for this place is fv:Kurklarr and that it belongs to the Marrku clan.\
\\so David Karlbuma\
\\dt 22/Dec/2006\
\
\\lx yorndidj\
\\ps n.\
\\sd material_culture\
\\de stone tipped spear or long stone tipped knife\
\
\\lx yorrme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de mass together in a group\
\\xv Ka-yorryorrme kuluban.\
\\xe The flying foxes are massing together.\
\\dt 10/Jul/2005\
\
\\lx yorrohme\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de place a direction marker by dragging the foot along the ground to leave a long mark\
\\uv I\
\\uv W= yurryurrhme.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yoweyh\
\\ps interj.\
\\de yes (variation of 'yo')\
\
\\lx yoyo\
\\va\
\\ph\
\\ps v.i.\
\\pd P -yoyoy\
\\ng reduplicated form of -yo\
\\mr\
\\sn\
\\ge be\
\\re be, lie (continuous)\
\\de to be lying continuously\
\\de\
\\de\
\\ng reduplicated form of -yo \
\\xv Ka-rrarrkid. Yey nani na-ngamenani wanjh na-ngamenani wanjh ngong,\
hey kornkumo yi-bengkan namekke ka-yoyo.\
\\xe He's alive. Oh whatsisname, who are all that mob now, hey you know, his father lies (buried) there.\
\\so Bob Burruwal\
\\xv Kun-bolidjkahwi barri-dadjkeyi, arri-dadjkeyi, ngayi ngandi-dadjkeng\
kun-bolidj njamed yorndidj, manenge ka-yo, korrokko ba-yoyoy.\
\\xe They all had cicatricies cut (on their bodies), we used to cut them and they cut me.\
They made my cicatrice with stone blades which lie around. A long time ago they\
used them all the time.\
\\so Lofty Bardayal Nadjamerek\
\\uv E, Djnj\
\\bb\
\\dt 22/Dec/2006\
\
\\lx yowyowme\
\\va yoyome\
\\ps v.i.\
\\sn 1\
\\ge flow\
\\re flow of water\
\\de Flow of water in a stream, river.\
\\sn 2\
\\re ooze out\
\\de Fluid ooze out.\
\\xv Yowyowmeng rowk wanjh berlngdanj rowk wanjh birri-mirrhkudjmey.\
\\xe The fluid all oozed out and then the swelling all went down and then they took out the sharp splinter.\
\
\\lx yowyowmi\
\\lc ka-yowyowmi\
\\ps n.\
\\ge rapids, white water\
\\de Rapids, fast flowing white water.\
\\xv Minj karri-djowkke kure ka-yowyowmi, ka-djurrhbahbang.\
\\sd geographic\
\
\\lx yudyudme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de run (of emus only)\
\
\\lx yuhyungki\
\\ps n.(plu)\
\\de first ones, ancestors, dreaming ancestors, the first people\
\\xv na-yahyungki\
\\xe the first people\
\
\\lx yuhyungki\
\\lc na-yuhyungki\
\\pr na-\
\\ps n.\
\\de first people, the first ancestors\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yukkuyukkuh\
\\ps n.\
\\sd insects\
\\de firefly\
\\xv Yukkuyukkuh manme kah-ngun yiman man-djulurkkun wanjh ka-kinje ka-birlekan.\
\\xe It eats food like the Antidesma berries and then cooks it and produces the light.\
\\xv Yoh birri-wayini yukkuyukkuh, "Yukkuyukkuh kabirlihbirli-kan, Yukkuyukkuh\
kabirlihbirli-kan, ka-rrulk-belbme, ka-rrulk-belbme, ka-rrulk-belbme." Nakamarrang\
wayihwayini.\
\\xe Yes they sing about the firefly, "Fireflies, they carry light, fireflies they carry light, they attach\
themselves to trees, they attach themselves to trees, they attach themselves to trees." Nakamarrang used\
to sing that.\
\\ee Common at the end of the wet season. Bangkerreng kabebme.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yukme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\cf so far only attested in fv:bodme-yukme and fv:berre-yukme.\
\\nt check\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yukno\
\\va yiwkno\
\\ps n.\
\\de fluid part of wild honey.\
\\xv Yo, yukno namekke yiman mankung yi-bengkan, bono nawu, namekke ngarri-marnbun\
ngarri-bongun.\
\\xe 'Yukno' that's honey you know, the liquid part, that's the part we drink.\
\\pde Kdj, Djnj= an-yiwk 'honey'.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yukngun\
\\ps v.t.\
\\de eat the syrup part of wild honey\
\\xv Modjarn ka-karuhkarung wanjh kah-yukngun. Yukno ka-ngun man-kung.\
\\xe He would dig and dig for honey and eat the syrup of it.\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx yuku\
\\pr an-\
\\pr man-\
\\ps n.\
\\ge Antidesma.parvifolium\
\\re fi:Antidesma_parvifolium\
\\de kind of shrub or small tree (1-3m) found in sandstone country with black or dark purple or black edible berries. A synonym for the plant fv:an-kurlbayi literally means \'91having blood\'92 which is a reference to the dark red juice.\
\\xv An-balinjdja man-me ngarri-nguni, barnemno ngarri-nguni djorlengno, yiman ka-yime yi-bengkan an-djurlukkurn,\
bad ngalengman ku-warddewaken ngarri-ngeybun an-yuku, an-djorleng black one. Anih an-kuken ngarri-ngun, an-yuku. \
\\xe fi:Vitex_acuminata has an edible fruit which we eat when ripe and its like the fi:Antidesma_ghaesembila fruit but it grows in the rock country. We call the rock version of fi:Antidesma_ghaesembila fv:an-yuku fi:(Antidesma_parvifolium). When it's ripe it's black. It's a well known traditional food, fi:Antidesma_parvifolium.\
\\sc Antidesma parvifolium\
\\uv Djnj, I, E, Kdj\
\\sy an-kurlbayi\
\\sd plant\
\\p anyuku:Antidesma parvifolium (in Kundedjnjenghmi plants3 file in iPhoto)\
\\dt 05/Oct/2007\
\
\\lx yukyuk\
\\ps n.\
\\ge shrike-thrush\
\\re sandstone shrike-thrush\
\\de Sandstone shrike-thrush.\
\\xv Yukyuk kabikodjdjemulewan barrk, kayime yukyukyukyuk barrk bukkan kayi.\
\\xe The sandstone shrike-thrush makes it known when it sees a black wallaroo sleeping. It calls out yukyukyukyuk, 'there's a black wallaroo sleeping here.'\
\\sc Colluricincla woodwardi\
\\uv Djnj\
\\sd bird\
\\dt 13/Oct/2003\
\
\\lx Yurlhmanj\
\\va yulhmanj\
\\ps n.\
\\ge clan_name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a clan which has two lineages and two separate estates, one being on the upper Kumadderr (Goomadeer) River region and the other is far to the south of there (in Jawoyn or Ngalkbon country)\
\\xv Andirdkorrang nabe walem. Nakka bukka bedberre bedman na-Buyhmi\'85 nomo na-Buyhmi\'85 na-Yulhman. Nuye Kamarrang na-ngamed, Nakurulmal kunred, Nakurulmal Kamarrang.\
\\xe Andirdkorrang is there a long way to the south (of the Arnhem Land plateau) and it is Buyhmi clan, hang on not Buyhmi... Yulhman clan. It belonged to Kamarrang-whatsisname, Nakurulmal's land, Kamarrang Nakurulmal.\
\\xv Wedjdji bu Yulhmanj kantri. Na-Yulhmanjbuyika marrek Djalbangurrk\
fi:one Djalbangurrk bad fi:two nawu kureh barri-buyika.\
\\xe Wedjdji is in Yulhmanj country. Another Yulhmanj clan, not the Djalbangurrk (estate lineage), one of the two is Djalbangurrk and the other is another group of people.\
\\sd clan_name\
\\so example 1 is LBN, example 2 is Mary Kolkiwarra\
\\dt 11/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx Yulukidj\
\\ps prop. n.\
\\ge clan.name\
\\re clan name\
\\de name of a Kunwinjku patriclan which has an Iwaidja analogue (different location and lineage) known as fv:Ildugij (in Iwaidja orthography)\
\\sd clan_name\
\\dt 10/Jun/2007\
\
\\lx yulukyuluk\
\\ps n.\
\\sd mammal\
\\de spotted quoll\
\\sc Dasyurus hallucatus\
\\pdv kk\
\\pde djabbo, djabboy, yulukyuluk (E)\
\\ee Kune, Rembarrnga, Dangbon =yulukyuluk\
\\dt 27/Feb/2006\
\
\\lx yulumad\
\\ps n.\
\\de gristle, kind of animal fat\
\\xv Yulumad karri-kinje ka-rayekmen.\
\\xe When we cook gristle it goes hard.\
\
\\lx yulyulme\
\\ps v.i.\
\\de swim beneath the surface of the water.\
\
\\lx yun\
\\va yuwn\
\\ps neg. part.\
\\sn 1\
\\de don't 2. sleep (imperitive)\
\\xv Yun yi-bangmeyarlkilekme.\
\\xe Don't touch the line yet (when it's swinging).\
\\xv Karri-yun.\
\\xe Let's sleep.\
\
\\lx yunkurr\
\\pr man- \
\\ps n. \
\\sd geographic \
\\de island\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yungki\
\\ps temp. adv.\
\\re first in sequence\
\\ge first\
\\de First in a sequence.\
\\xv Ngayi nga-yungki nga-rrulubom wanjh nungka rerre. \
\\xe I shot it first and then he shot it next.\
\\sy werrk\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx yungki\
\\ps n. \
\\re ahead\
\\re in front\
\\ge ahead\
\\de ahead, in front \
\\xv Birri-dokmeng yungki.\
\\xe They've gone on ahead.\
\\cf na-yuhyungki \
\\ce The first ones (people), ancestors.\
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx yungki\
\\pr kun- \
\\ps n. \
\\de the beginning, at the start\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yunjmang\
\\ps v.t.\
\\ge butcher\
\\re butcher for distribution\
\\de butcher game into cuts of meat for distribution\
\\xv Bininj marrek karri-kayburren kayakki, ngurrurdu na-djamun djarran dadno, kun-balem njalehnjale mobalhno konhda yi-mobalhdjobke yi-mobalhdjobke yi-yunjmang rowk wanjh yi-benkanjwon nawu Bininj na-wern.\
\\xe We Aboriginal people would never refuse to share emu meat because emus are sacred and the parts were all cut up, the legs, the fat, the\
drumstick, you cut the upper leg here and here and butcher all of it for distribution, giving the meat out to many people.\
\\dt 21/Dec/2007\
\
\\lx yurduh\
\\ps n.\
\\ge honey\
\\re honey type\
\\de Kind of honey and the bee species that makes it; usually found in tree hollows.\
\\sc Austroplebeia magna\
\\sd honey\
\\uv E, Rembarrnga\
\\ur I= bobbidj\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yurrhke\
\\ps v.t.\
\\sn 1\
\\de leave behind, overtake\
\\xv Nani ka-ngudjbang kaben-yurrhke. \
\\xe He's really fast, he'll beat them all.\
\\sn 2\
\\de exceed in capacity, size or volume\
\\xv Nani kabi-yurrhke. \
\\xe This one has more than that one (reference to one container having more water than another). \
\\sn 2\
\\de outperform another, exceed in ability\
\\xv Nungka ngun-yurrhkeng Kuninjku ka-wokdi. \
\\xe He can speak Kuninjku better than you. \
\\xv Ngudda yiben-yurrhkeng mayh yi-bengkan. \
\\xe Your knowledge of ceremony is better than theirs. \
\\dt 20/Mar/2007\
\
\\lx yurrmerren\
\\ps v.refl.\
\\de pass each other going in opposite directions.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yurruburdihme\
\\ps  v.i. \
\\de  gallop, run \
\\xv  Ngaleng nganabbarru kam-yurruburdihmeng woh-mankang doweng. \
\\xe  That buffalo came running towards us but fell down dead half way.\
\
\\lx yurrun\
\\pr  man- \
\\ps  n. \
\\pdv  kk \
\\de  string \
\\pde  kun-yarl.\
\\dt 11/Jun/2006\
\
\\lx yurryurrhme\
\\ps v.t. \
\\de  place a direction marker by dragging the foot along the ground to leave a long mark.\
\\ee These marks are made to indicate to other people who might be following a track or walking route in\
which direction someone has travelled.\
\\xv  Manlarrhkarredjamdi Nakorrkko bene-yurryurrhmeng. \
\\xe  At Manlarrhkarredjamdi the Nakorrkko ancestors made a ground mark with their feet. \
\\uv  W, Djnj\
\\ur  I= yorrohme.\
\\dt 06/May/2006\
\
\\lx yuyhmire\
\\ps v.i.\
\\mr yuyhmi 'incorporated verb form' - re 'go'\
\\ge go.along.calling.'yuy'\
\\re call out 'yuy' as going along\
\\de to call out 'yuy' as going along\
\\ng a gerundivised verb\
\\xv Weyakweyak ba-kurlbakani kurlba ba-rey. Bayimi 'yuy yuy' ba-kayhmi ba-yuyhmirey, fi:that kurlba ba-kadjungi fi:line_up anekke kun-wardde fi:line ka-djale ba-yibmeng konda, kalkberd, nakkan Nawarray-beh ba-rrolkang. \
\\xe Black-faced cuckoo shrike fi:(Coracina_novaehollandiae) followed the trail of blood. He groaned 'yuy yuy', and went along calling out 'yuy' and he followed the blood and these rocks are all lined up [indicating the route the kangaroo took] and he keeps going and sank here, that male euro who came from Nawarray.\
\\so LBN\
\\uv W, Djnj, Kdj\
\\dt 16/May/2007\
}